<question>what is (are) breast cancer ?<answer>how tumors form the body is made up of many types of cells. normally, cells grow, divide and produce more cells as needed to keep the body healthy. sometimes, however, the process goes wrong. cells become abnormal and form more cells in an uncontrolled way. these extra cells form a mass of tissue, called a growth or tumor. tumors can be benign, which means not cancerous, or malignant, which means cancerous. breast cancer occurs when malignant tumors form in the breast tissue. who gets breast cancer? breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in american women. it is most common among women between the ages of 45-85. (watch the video to learn more about breast cancer survival rates. to enlarge the videos appearing on this page, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner of the video screen. to reduce the videos, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) men can get breast cancer too, although they account for only 1 percent of all reported cases. read more about breast cancer in men. when breast cancer spreads when cancer grows in breast tissue and spreads outside the breast, cancer cells are often found in the lymph nodes under the arm. if the cancer has reached these nodes, it means that cancer cells may have spread, or metastasized, to other parts of the body. when cancer spreads from its original location in the breast to another part of the body such as the brain, it is called metastatic breast cancer, not brain cancer. doctors sometimes call this "distant" disease. learn about different kinds of breast cancer. breast cancer is not contagious breast cancer is not contagious. a woman cannot "catch" breast cancer from other women who have the disease. also, breast cancer is not caused by an injury to the breast. most women who develop breast cancer do not have any known risk factors or a history of the disease in their families. treating and surviving breast cancer today, more women are surviving breast cancer than ever before. nearly three million women are breast cancer survivors. (watch the video to hear a woman discuss surviving breast cancer.) there are several ways to treat breast cancer, but all treatments work best when the disease is found early. as a matter of fact, when it is caught in its earliest stage, 98.5 percent of women with the disease are alive five years later. every day researchers are working to find new and better ways to detect and treat cancer. many studies of new approaches for women with breast cancer are under way. with early detection, and prompt and appropriate treatment, the outlook for women with breast cancer can be positive. to learn more about what happens after treatment, see surviving cancer.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for breast cancer ?<answer>there are a number of treatments for breast cancer, but the ones women choose most often -- alone or in combination -- are surgery, hormone therapy, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. what standard treatments do here is what the standard cancer treatments are designed to do. - surgery takes out the cancer and some surrounding tissue. - hormone therapy keeps cancer cells from getting most of the hormones they need to survive and grow. - radiation therapy uses high-energy beams to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors and some surrounding tissue. - chemotherapy uses anti-cancer drugs to kill most cancer cells. surgery takes out the cancer and some surrounding tissue. hormone therapy keeps cancer cells from getting most of the hormones they need to survive and grow. radiation therapy uses high-energy beams to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors and some surrounding tissue. chemotherapy uses anti-cancer drugs to kill most cancer cells. treatment for breast cancer may involve local or whole body therapy. doctors use local therapies, such as surgery or radiation, to remove or destroy breast cancer in a specific area. whole body, or systemic, treatments like chemotherapy, hormonal, or biological therapies are used to destroy or control cancer throughout the body. some patients have both kinds of treatment. treating early-stage breast cancer if you have early-stage breast cancer, one common treatment available to you is a lumpectomy combined with radiation therapy. a lumpectomy is surgery that preserves a woman's breast. in a lumpectomy, the surgeon removes only the tumor and a small amount of the surrounding tissue. the survival rate for a woman who has this therapy plus radiation is similar to that for a woman who chooses a radical mastectomy, which is complete removal of a breast. if cancer has spread locally if you have breast cancer that has spread locally -- just to other parts of the breast -- your treatment may involve a combination of chemotherapy and surgery. doctors usually first shrink the tumor with chemotherapy and then remove it through surgery. shrinking the tumor before surgery may allow a woman to avoid a mastectomy and keep her breast. in the past, doctors would remove a lot of lymph nodes near breast tumors to see if the cancer had spread. some doctors also use a method called sentinel node biopsy. using a dye or radioactive tracer, surgeons locate the first or sentinel lymph node closest to the tumor, and remove only that node to see if the cancer has spread. if cancer has spread beyond the breast if the breast cancer has spread to other parts of the body, such as the lung or bone, you might receive chemotherapy and/or hormonal therapy to destroy cancer cells and control the disease. radiation therapy may also be useful to control tumors in other parts of the body. get more information about treatment options for breast cancer and for recurrent breast cancer.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for breast cancer ?<answer>key points - treatment options for pregnant women depend on the stage of the disease and the age of the unborn baby. - three types of standard treatment are used: - surgery - radiation therapy - chemotherapy - ending the pregnancy does not seem to improve the mothers chance of survival. - treatment for breast cancer may cause side effects. treatment options for pregnant women depend on the stage of the disease and the age of the unborn baby. three types of standard treatment are used: surgery most pregnant women with breast cancer have surgery to remove the breast. some of the lymph nodes under the arm may be removed and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. types of surgery to remove the cancer include: - modified radical mastectomy: surgery to remove the whole breast that has cancer, many of the lymph nodes under the arm, the lining over the chest muscles, and sometimes, part of the chest wall muscles. this type of surgery is most common in pregnant women. - breast-conserving surgery: surgery to remove the cancer and some normal tissue around it, but not the breast itself. part of the chest wall lining may also be removed if the cancer is near it. this type of surgery may also be called lumpectomy, partial mastectomy, segmental mastectomy, quadrantectomy, or breast-sparing surgery. even if the doctor removes all of the cancer that can be seen at the time of surgery, the patient may be given radiation therapy or chemotherapy after surgery to try to kill any cancer cells that may be left. for pregnant women with early-stage breast cancer, radiation therapy and hormone therapy are given after the baby is born. treatment given after surgery, to lower the risk that the cancer will come back, is called adjuvant therapy. radiation therapy radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. there are two types of radiation therapy: - external radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. the way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. external radiation therapy is not given to pregnant women with early stage (stage i or ii) breast cancer because it can harm the unborn baby. for women with late stage (stage iii or iv) breast cancer, radiation therapy is not given during the first 3 months of pregnancy and is delayed until after the baby is born, if possible. chemotherapy chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing. when chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). when chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). the way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated. chemotherapy is usually not given during the first 3 months of pregnancy. chemotherapy given after this time does not usually harm the unborn baby but may cause early labor and low birth weight. see drugs approved for breast cancer for more information. ending the pregnancy does not seem to improve the mothers chance of survival. because ending the pregnancy is not likely to improve the mothers chance of survival, it is not usually a treatment option. treatment for breast cancer may cause side effects. for information about side effects caused by treatment for cancer, see our side effects page. treatment options by stage early stage breast cancer (stage i and stage ii) treatment of early-stage breast cancer (stage i and stage ii) may include the following: - modified radical mastectomy. - breast-conserving surgery followed by radiation therapy. in pregnant women, radiation therapy is delayed until after the baby is born. - modified radical mastectomy or breast-conserving surgery during pregnancy followed by chemotherapy after the first 3 months of pregnancy. late stage breast cancer (stage iii and stage iv) treatment of late-stage breast cancer (stage iii and stage iv) may include the following: - radiation therapy. - chemotherapy. radiation therapy and chemotherapy should not be given during the first 3 months of pregnancy.<end>
<question>who is at risk for breast cancer? ?<answer>risk factors are conditions or agents that increase a person's chances of getting a disease. here are the most common risk factors for breast cancer. - personal and family history. a personal history of breast cancer or breast cancer among one or more of your close relatives, such as a sister, mother, or daughter. - estrogen levels in the body. high estrogen levels over a long time may increase the risk of breast cancer. estrogen levels are highest during the years a woman is menstruating. - never being pregnant or having your first child in your mid-30s or later. - early menstruation. having your first menstrual period before age 12. - breast density. women with very dense breasts have a higher risk of breast cancer than women with low or normal breast density. - combination hormone replacement therapy/hormone therapy. estrogen, progestin, or both may be given to replace the estrogen no longer made by the ovaries in postmenopausal women or women who have had their ovaries removed. this is called hormone replacement therapy. (hrt) or hormone therapy (ht). combination hrt/ht is estrogen combined with progestin. this type of hrt/ht can increase the risk of breast cancer. - exposure to radiation. radiation therapy to the chest for the treatment of cancer can increase the risk of breast cancer, starting 10 years after treatment. radiation therapy to treat cancer in one breast does not appear to increase the risk of cancer in the other breast. - obesity. obesity increases the risk of breast cancer, especially in postmenopausal women who have not used hormone replacement therapy. - alcohol. drinking alcohol increases the risk of breast cancer. the level of risk rises as the amount of alcohol consumed rises. - gaining weight after menopause, especially after natural menopause and/or after age 60. - race. white women are at greater risk than black women. however, black women diagnosed with breast cancer are more likely to die of the disease. - inherited gene changes. women who have inherited certain changes in the genes named brca1 and brca2 have a higher risk of breast cancer, ovarian cancer and maybe colon cancer. the risk of breast cancer caused by inherited gene changes depends on the type of gene mutation, family history of cancer, and other factors. men who have inherited certain changes in the brca2 gene have a higher risk of breast, prostate and pancreatic cancers, and lymphoma. five percent to 10 percent of all breast cancers are thought to be inherited. personal and family history. a personal history of breast cancer or breast cancer among one or more of your close relatives, such as a sister, mother, or daughter. estrogen levels in the body. high estrogen levels over a long time may increase the risk of breast cancer. estrogen levels are highest during the years a woman is menstruating. never being pregnant or having your first child in your mid-30s or later. early menstruation. having your first menstrual period before age 12. breast density. women with very dense breasts have a higher risk of breast cancer than women with low or normal breast density. combination hormone replacement therapy/hormone therapy. estrogen, progestin, or both may be given to replace the estrogen no longer made by the ovaries in postmenopausal women or women who have had their ovaries removed. this is called hormone replacement therapy. (hrt) or hormone therapy (ht). combination hrt/ht is estrogen combined with progestin. this type of hrt/ht can increase the risk of breast cancer. exposure to radiation. radiation therapy to the chest for the treatment of cancer can increase the risk of breast cancer, starting 10 years after treatment. radiation therapy to treat cancer in one breast does not appear to increase the risk of cancer in the other breast. obesity. obesity increases the risk of breast cancer, especially in postmenopausal women who have not used hormone replacement therapy. alcohol. drinking alcohol increases the risk of breast cancer. the level of risk rises as the amount of alcohol consumed rises. gaining weight after menopause, especially after natural menopause and/or after age 60. race. white women are at greater risk than black women. however, black women diagnosed with breast cancer are more likely to die of the disease. inherited gene changes. women who have inherited certain changes in the genes named brca1 and brca2 have a higher risk of breast cancer, ovarian cancer and maybe colon cancer. the risk of breast cancer caused by inherited gene changes depends on the type of gene mutation, family history of cancer, and other factors. men who have inherited certain changes in the brca2 gene have a higher risk of breast, prostate and pancreatic cancers, and lymphoma. five percent to 10 percent of all breast cancers are thought to be inherited. get information about the brca1 and brca2 genetic mutations and testing for them. this chart shows what the approximate chances are of a woman getting invasive breast cancer in her lifetime.<end>
<question>what is (are) prostate cancer ?<answer>key points - prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. - signs of prostate cancer include a weak flow of urine or frequent urination. - tests that examine the prostate and blood are used to detect (find) and diagnose prostate cancer. - certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. prostate cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the prostate. the prostate is a gland in the male reproductive system. it lies just below the bladder (the organ that collects and empties urine) and in front of the rectum (the lower part of the intestine). it is about the size of a walnut and surrounds part of the urethra (the tube that empties urine from the bladder). the prostate gland makes fluid that is part of the semen. prostate cancer is most common in older men. in the u.s., about 1 out of 5 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer.<end>
<question>who is at risk for prostate cancer? ?<answer>avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent cancer. avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. the following risk factors may increase the risk of prostate cancer: age prostate cancer is rare in men younger than 50 years of age. the chance of developing prostate cancer increases as men get older. family history of prostate cancer a man whose father, brother, or son has had prostate cancer has a higher-than-average risk of prostate cancer. race prostate cancer occurs more often in african-american men than in white men. african-american men with prostate cancer are more likely to die from the disease than white men with prostate cancer. hormones the prostate needs male hormones to work the way it should. the main male sex hormone is testosterone. testosterone helps the body develop and maintain male sex characteristics. testosterone is changed into dihydrotestosterone (dht) by an enzyme in the body. dht is important for normal prostate growth but can also cause the prostate to get bigger and may play a part in the development of prostate cancer. vitamin e the selenium and vitamin e cancer prevention trial (select) found that vitamin e taken alone increased the risk of prostate cancer. the risk continued even after the men stopped taking vitamin e. folic acid folate is a kind of vitamin b that occurs naturally in some foods, such as green vegetables, beans and orange juice. folic acid is a man-made form of folate that is found in vitamin supplements and fortified foods, such as whole-grain breads and cereals. a 10-year study showed that the risk of prostate cancer was increased in men who took 1 milligram (mg) supplements of folic acid. however, the risk of prostate cancer was lower in men who had enough folate in their diets. dairy and calcium a diet high in dairy foods and calcium may cause a small increase in the risk of prostate cancer. the following protective factors may decrease the risk of prostate cancer: folate folate is a kind of vitamin b that occurs naturally in some foods, such as green vegetables, beans and orange juice. folic acid is a man-made form of folate that is found in vitamin supplements and fortified foods, such as whole-grain breads and cereals. a 10-year study showed that the risk of prostate cancer was lower in men who had enough folate in their diets. however, the risk of prostate cancer was increased in men who took 1 milligram (mg) supplements of folic acid. finasteride and dutasteride finasteride and dutasteride are drugs used to lower the amount of male sex hormones made by the body. these drugs block the enzyme that changes testosterone into dihydrotestosterone (dht). higher than normal levels of dht may play a part in developing prostate cancer. taking finasteride or dutasteride has been shown to lower the risk for prostate cancer, but it is not known if these drugs lower the risk of death from prostate cancer. the prostate cancer prevention trial (pcpt) studied whether the drug finasteride can prevent prostate cancer in healthy men 55 years of age and older. this prevention study showed there were fewer prostate cancers in the group of men that took finasteride compared with the group of men that did not. also, the men who took finasteride who did have prostate cancer had more aggressive tumors. the number of deaths from prostate cancer was the same in both groups. men who took finasteride reported more side effects compared with the group of men that did not, including erectile dysfunction, loss of desire for sex, and enlarged breasts. the reduction by dutasteride of prostate cancer events trial (reduce) studied whether the drug dutasteride can prevent prostate cancer in men aged 50 to 75 years at higher risk for the disease. this prevention study showed there were fewer prostate cancers in the group of men who took dutasteride compared with the group of men that did not. the number of less aggressive prostate cancers was lower, but the number of more aggressive prostate cancers was not. men who took dutasteride reported more side effects than men who did not, including erectile dysfunction, loss of desire for sex, less semen, and gynecomastia (enlarged breasts). the following have been proven not to affect the risk of prostate cancer, or their effects on prostate cancer risk are not known: selenium and vitamin e the selenium and vitamin e cancer prevention trial (select) studied whether taking vitamin e and selenium (a mineral) will prevent prostate cancer. the selenium and vitamin e were taken separately or together by healthy men 55 years of age and older (50 years of age and older for african-american men). the study showed that taking selenium alone or selenium and vitamin e together did not decrease the risk of prostate cancer. diet it is not known if decreasing fat or increasing fruits and vegetables in the diet helps decrease the risk of prostate cancer or death from prostate cancer. in the pcpt trial, certain fatty acids increased the risk of high-grade prostate cancer while others decreased the risk of high-grade prostate cancer. multivitamins regular use of multivitamins has not been proven to increase the risk of early or localized prostate cancer. however, a large study showed an increased risk of advanced prostate cancer among men who took multivitamins more than seven times a week. lycopene some studies have shown that a diet high in lycopene may be linked to a decreased risk of prostate cancer, but other studies have not. it has not been proven that taking lycopene supplements decreases the risk of prostate cancer.<end>
<question>who is at risk for prostate cancer? ?<answer>researchers are studying changes in genes that may increase the risk for developing prostate cancer. some studies are looking at the genes of men who were diagnosed with prostate cancer at a relatively young age, less than 55 years old, and the genes of families who have several members with the disease. other studies are trying to identify which genes, or arrangements of genes, are most likely to lead to prostate cancer. much more work is needed, however, before scientists can say exactly how genetic changes relate to prostate cancer. at the moment, no genetic risk has been firmly established.<end>
<question>what is (are) prostate cancer ?<answer>prostate cancer is a common disease that affects men, usually in middle age or later. in this disorder, certain cells in the prostate become abnormal and multiply without control or order to form a tumor. the prostate is a gland that surrounds the male urethra and helps produce semen, the fluid that carries sperm. early prostate cancer usually does not cause pain, and most affected men exhibit no noticeable symptoms. men are often diagnosed as the result of health screenings, such as a blood test for a substance called prostate specific antigen (psa) or a medical procedure called a digital rectal exam. as the tumor grows larger, signs and symptoms can include difficulty starting or stopping the flow of urine, a feeling of not being able to empty the bladder completely, blood in the urine or semen, or pain with ejaculation. however, these changes can also occur with many other genitourinary conditions. having one or more of these symptoms does not necessarily mean that a man has prostate cancer. the severity and outcome of prostate cancer varies widely. early-stage prostate cancer can usually be treated successfully, and some older men have prostate tumors that grow so slowly that they may never cause health problems during their lifetime, even without treatment. in other men, however, the cancer is much more aggressive; in these cases, prostate cancer can be life-threatening. some cancerous tumors can invade surrounding tissue and spread to other parts of the body. tumors that begin at one site and then spread to other areas of the body are called metastatic cancers. the signs and symptoms of metastatic cancer depend on where the disease has spread. if prostate cancer spreads, cancerous cells most often appear in the lymph nodes, bones, lungs, liver, or brain. bone metastases of prostate cancer most often cause pain in the lower back, pelvis, or hips. a small percentage of all prostate cancers cluster in families. these hereditary cancers are associated with inherited gene mutations. hereditary prostate cancers tend to develop earlier in life than non-inherited (sporadic) cases.<end>
<question>who is at risk for stroke? ?<answer>certain traits, conditions, and habits can raise your risk of having a stroke or transient ischemic attack (tia). these traits, conditions, and habits are known as risk factors. the more risk factors you have, the more likely you are to have a stroke. you can treat or control some risk factors, such as high blood pressure and smoking. other risk factors, such as age and gender, you cant control. the major risk factors for stroke include: high blood pressure. high blood pressure is the main risk factor for stroke. blood pressure is considered high if it stays at or above 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mmhg) over time. if you have diabetes or chronic kidney disease, high blood pressure is defined as 130/80 mmhg or higher. diabetes. diabetes is a disease in which the blood sugar level is high because the body doesnt make enough insulin or doesnt use its insulin properly. insulin is a hormone that helps move blood sugar into cells where its used for energy. heart diseases.coronary heart disease,cardiomyopathy,heart failure, andatrial fibrillationcan cause blood clots that can lead to a stroke. smoking. smoking can damage blood vessels and raise blood pressure. smoking also may reduce the amount of oxygen that reaches your bodys tissues. exposure to secondhand smoke also can damage the blood vessels. age and gender. your risk of stroke increases as you get older. at younger ages, men are more likely than women to have strokes. however, women are more likely to die from strokes. women who take birth control pills also are at slightly higher risk of stroke. race and ethnicity. strokes occur more often in african american, alaska native, and american indian adults than in white, hispanic, or asian american adults. personal or family history of stroke or tia. if youve had a stroke, youre at higher risk for another one. your risk of having a repeat stroke is the highest right after a stroke. a tia also increases your risk of having a stroke, as does having a family history of stroke. brainaneurysmsor arteriovenous malformations (avms). aneurysms are balloon-like bulges in an artery that can stretch and burst. avms are tangles of faulty arteries and veins that can rupture (break open) within the brain. avms may be present at birth, but often arent diagnosed until they rupture. other risk factors for stroke, many of which of you can control, include: alcohol and illegal drug use, including cocaine, amphetamines, and other drugs certain medical conditions, such as sickle cell disease, vasculitis (inflammation of the blood vessels), and bleeding disorders lack of physical activity overweight and obesity stress and depression unhealthy cholesterol levels unhealthy diet use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids), but not aspirin, may increase the risk of heart attack or stroke, particularly in patients who have had a heart attack or cardiac bypass surgery. the risk may increase the longer nsaids are used. common nsaids include ibuprofen and naproxen. following a healthy lifestyle can lower the risk of stroke. some people also may need to take medicines to lower their risk. sometimes strokes can occur in people who dont have any known risk factors.<end>
<question>how to diagnose stroke ?<answer>doctors have several techniques and imaging tools to help diagnose stroke quickly and accurately. the first step in diagnosis is a short neurological examination, or an evaluation of the nervous system. when a possible stroke patient arrives at a hospital, a health care professional, usually a doctor or nurse, will ask the patient or a companion what happened and when the symptoms began. blood tests, an electrocardiogram, and a brain scan such as computed tomography (ct) or magnetic resonance imaging (mri) will often be done.<end>
<question>what is (are) stroke ?<answer>a stroke occurs if the flow of oxygen-rich blood to a portion of the brain is blocked. without oxygen, brain cells start to die after a few minutes. sudden bleeding in the brain also can cause a stroke if it damages brain cells. if brain cells die or are damaged because of a stroke, symptoms occur in the parts of the body that these brain cells control. examples of stroke symptoms include sudden weakness; paralysis or numbness of the face, arms, or legs (paralysis is an inability to move); trouble speaking or understanding speech; and trouble seeing. a stroke is a serious medical condition that requires emergency care. a stroke can cause lasting brain damage, long-term disability, or even death. if you think you or someone else is having a stroke, call 911 right away. do not drive to the hospital or let someone else drive you. call an ambulance so that medical personnel can begin life-saving treatment on the way to the emergency room. during a stroke, every minute counts. overview the two main types of stroke are ischemic (is-ke-mik) and hemorrhagic (hem-ah-raj-ik). ischemic is the more common type of stroke. an ischemic stroke occurs if an artery that supplies oxygen-rich blood to the brain becomes blocked. blood clots often cause the blockages that lead to ischemic strokes. a hemorrhagic stroke occurs if an artery in the brain leaks blood or ruptures (breaks open). the pressure from the leaked blood damages brain cells. high blood pressure and aneurysms (an-u-risms) are examples of conditions that can cause hemorrhagic strokes. (aneurysms are balloon-like bulges in an artery that can stretch and burst.) another condition thats similar to a stroke is a transient ischemic attack, also called a tia or mini-stroke. a tia occurs if blood flow to a portion of the brain is blocked only for a short time. thus, damage to the brain cells isnt permanent (lasting). like ischemic strokes, tias often are caused by blood clots. although tias are not full-blown strokes, they greatly increase the risk of having a stroke. if you have a tia, its important for your doctor to find the cause so you can take steps to prevent a stroke. both strokes and tias require emergency care. outlook stroke is a leading cause of death in the united states. many factors can raise your risk of having a stroke. talk with your doctor about how you can control these risk factors and help prevent a stroke. if you have a stroke, prompt treatment can reduce damage to your brain and help you avoid lasting disabilities. prompt treatment also may help prevent another stroke. researchers continue to study the causes and risk factors for stroke. theyre also finding new and better treatments and new ways to help the brain repair itself after a stroke.<end>
<question>what is (are) stroke ?<answer>brain plasticity is the brain's ability to learn and change, allowing it to adapt to deficits and injury and to take over the functions of damaged cells. when cells in an area of the brain responsible for a particular function die after a stroke, the patient becomes unable to perform that function. however, the brain's ability torewire the connections between its nerve cells allows it to compensate for lost functions.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of skin cancer ?<answer>skin cancer is usually visible. changes in your skin, such as lumps, scabs, red spots, rough patches, or new or irregular moles should be reported to your doctor. you should also see a doctor if you have a mole, birthmark, or other pigmented area of skin that can be classified by the abcde symptom system. abcde stands for melanoma skin cancer is more difficult to treat, so it is important to check for signs and seek treatment as soon as possible. use the following abcde rule to remember the symptoms of melanoma. see a doctor if you have a mole, birthmark, or other pigmented area of skin with a = asymmetry. one half of the mole looks different than the other half. (top left image) b = border. the edges are often ragged, notched, or blurred in outline. the pigment may spread into the surrounding skin. (top right image) c = color. the mole is more than one color. shades of black, brown, and tan may be present. areas of white, gray, red, pink, or blue may also be seen.(bottom left image) d = diameter.there is a change in size, usually an increase. melanomas can be tiny, but most are larger than the size of a pea (larger than 6 millimeters or about 1/4 inch). (bottom right image) e = evolving. the mole has changed over the past few weeks or months. other symptoms of skin cancer include a bleeding mole or the appearance of more moles around the first one.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for skin cancer ?<answer>the national cancer institute has developed a comprehensive online cancer database called the physician data query (pdq) to present evidence from the most recent research on melanoma and other skin cancers. click here to see the pdq. a window will open. click the "x" in the upper right hand corner of the "pdq" window to return here.<end>
<question>who is at risk for skin cancer? ?<answer>skin color and being exposed to sunlight can increase the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. anything that increases your chance of getting a disease is called a risk factor. having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesnt mean that you will not get cancer. talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. risk factors for basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma include the following: - being exposed to natural sunlight or artificial sunlight (such as from tanning beds) over long periods of time. - having a fair complexion, which includes the following: - fair skin that freckles and burns easily, does not tan, or tans poorly. - blue or green or other light-colored eyes. - red or blond hair. - having actinic keratosis. - past treatment with radiation. - having a weakened immune system. - having certain changes in the genes that are linked to skin cancer. - being exposed to arsenic.<end>
<question>what is (are) skin cancer ?<answer>key points - skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. - there are different types of cancer that start in the skin. - skin color and being exposed to sunlight can increase the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. - nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis often appear as a change in the skin. - tests or procedures that examine the skin are used to detect (find) and diagnose nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. - certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. skin cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the skin. the skin is the bodys largest organ. it protects against heat, sunlight, injury, and infection. skin also helps control body temperature and stores water, fat, and vitamin d. the skin has several layers, but the two main layers are the epidermis (upper or outer layer) and the dermis (lower or inner layer). skin cancer begins in the epidermis, which is made up of three kinds of cells: - squamous cells: thin, flat cells that form the top layer of the epidermis. - basal cells: round cells under the squamous cells. - melanocytes: cells that make melanin and are found in the lower part of the epidermis. melanin is the pigment that gives skin its natural color. when skin is exposed to the sun, melanocytes make more pigment and cause the skin to darken. skin cancer can occur anywhere on the body, but it is most common in skin that is often exposed to sunlight, such as the face, neck, hands, and arms. there are different types of cancer that start in the skin. the most common types are basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, which are nonmelanoma skin cancers. nonmelanoma skin cancers rarely spread to other parts of the body. melanoma is a much rarer type of skin cancer. it is more likely to invade nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body. actinic keratosis is a skin condition that sometimes becomes squamous cell carcinoma. this summary is about nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis. see the following pdq summaries for information on melanoma and other kinds of cancer that affect the skin: - melanoma treatment - mycosis fungoides and the szary syndrome treatment - kaposi sarcoma treatment - merkel cell carcinoma treatment - unusual cancers of childhood treatment - genetics of skin cancer nonmelanoma skin cancer and actinic keratosis often appear as a change in the skin. not all changes in the skin are a sign of nonmelanoma skin cancer or actinic keratosis. check with your doctor if you notice any changes in your skin. signs of nonmelanoma skin cancer include the following: - a sore that does not heal. - areas of the skin that are: - raised, smooth, shiny, and look pearly. - firm and look like a scar, and may be white, yellow, or waxy. - raised, and red or reddish-brown. - scaly, bleeding or crusty.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of lung cancer ?<answer>the possible signs of lung cancer are: - a cough that doesn't go away and gets worse over time - constant chest pain - coughing up blood - shortness of breath, wheezing, or hoarseness - repeated problems with pneumonia or bronchitis - swelling of the neck and face - loss of appetite or weight loss - fatigue. a cough that doesn't go away and gets worse over time constant chest pain coughing up blood shortness of breath, wheezing, or hoarseness repeated problems with pneumonia or bronchitis swelling of the neck and face loss of appetite or weight loss fatigue.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for lung cancer ?<answer>doctors treat patients with non-small cell lung cancer in several ways, and surgery is a common treatment. cryosurgery, a treatment that freezes and destroys cancer tissue, may be used to control symptoms in the later stages of non-small cell lung cancer. doctors may also use radiation therapy and chemotherapy to slow the progress of the disease and to manage symptoms. see more on treatments for non-small cell lung cancer.<end>
<question>who is at risk for lung cancer? ?<answer>key points - avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent lung cancer. - the following are risk factors for lung cancer: - cigarette, cigar, and pipe smoking - secondhand smoke - family history - hiv infection - environmental risk factors - beta carotene supplements in heavy smokers - the following are protective factors for lung cancer: - not smoking - quitting smoking - lower exposure to workplace risk factors - lower exposure to radon - it is not clear if the following decrease the risk of lung cancer: - diet - physical activity - the following do not decrease the risk of lung cancer: - beta carotene supplements in nonsmokers - vitamin e supplements - cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - new ways to prevent lung cancer are being studied in clinical trials. avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent lung cancer. avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. the following are risk factors for lung cancer: cigarette, cigar, and pipe smoking tobacco smoking is the most important risk factor for lung cancer. cigarette, cigar, and pipe smoking all increase the risk of lung cancer. tobacco smoking causes about 9 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in men and about 8 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in women. studies have shown that smoking low tar or low nicotine cigarettes does not lower the risk of lung cancer. studies also show that the risk of lung cancer from smoking cigarettes increases with the number of cigarettes smoked per day and the number of years smoked. people who smoke have about 20 times the risk of lung cancer compared to those who do not smoke. secondhand smoke being exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke is also a risk factor for lung cancer. secondhand smoke is the smoke that comes from a burning cigarette or other tobacco product, or that is exhaled by smokers. people who inhale secondhand smoke are exposed to the same cancer -causing agents as smokers, although in smaller amounts. inhaling secondhand smoke is called involuntary or passive smoking. family history having a family history of lung cancer is a risk factor for lung cancer. people with a relative who has had lung cancer may be twice as likely to have lung cancer as people who do not have a relative who has had lung cancer. because cigarette smoking tends to run in families and family members are exposed to secondhand smoke, it is hard to know whether the increased risk of lung cancer is from the family history of lung cancer or from being exposed to cigarette smoke. hiv infection being infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), the cause of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), is linked with a higher risk of lung cancer. people infected with hiv may have more than twice the risk of lung cancer than those who are not infected. since smoking rates are higher in those infected with hiv than in those not infected, it is not clear whether the increased risk of lung cancer is from hiv infection or from being exposed to cigarette smoke. environmental risk factors - radiation exposure: being exposed to radiation is a risk factor for lung cancer. atomic bomb radiation, radiation therapy, imaging tests, and radon are sources of radiation exposure: - atomic bomb radiation: being exposed to radiation after an atomic bomb explosion increases the risk of lung cancer. - radiation therapy: radiation therapy to the chest may be used to treat certain cancers, including breast cancer and hodgkin lymphoma. radiation therapy uses x-rays, gamma rays, or other types of radiation that may increase the risk of lung cancer. the higher the dose of radiation received, the higher the risk. the risk of lung cancer following radiation therapy is higher in patients who smoke than in nonsmokers. - imaging tests: imaging tests, such as ct scans, expose patients to radiation. low-dose spiral ct scans expose patients to less radiation than higher dose ct scans. in lung cancer screening, the use of low-dose spiral ct scans can lessen the harmful effects of radiation. - radon: radon is a radioactive gas that comes from the breakdown of uranium in rocks and soil. it seeps up through the ground, and leaks into the air or water supply. radon can enter homes through cracks in floors, walls, or the foundation, and levels of radon can build up over time. studies show that high levels of radon gas inside the home or workplace increase the number of new cases of lung cancer and the number of deaths caused by lung cancer. the risk of lung cancer is higher in smokers exposed to radon than in nonsmokers who are exposed to it. in people who have never smoked, about 30% of deaths caused by lung cancer have been linked to being exposed to radon. - workplace exposure: studies show that being exposed to the following substances increases the risk of lung cancer: - asbestos. - arsenic. - chromium. - nickel. - beryllium. - cadmium. - tar and soot. these substances can cause lung cancer in people who are exposed to them in the workplace and have never smoked. as the level of exposure to these substances increases, the risk of lung cancer also increases. the risk of lung cancer is even higher in people who are exposed and also smoke. - air pollution: studies show that living in areas with higher levels of air pollution increases the risk of lung cancer. beta carotene supplements in heavy smokers taking beta carotene supplements (pills) increases the risk of lung cancer, especially in smokers who smoke one or more packs a day. the risk is higher in smokers who have at least one alcoholic drink every day. the following are protective factors for lung cancer: not smoking the best way to prevent lung cancer is to not smoke. quitting smoking smokers can decrease their risk of lung cancer by quitting. in smokers who have been treated for lung cancer, quitting smoking lowers the risk of new lung cancers. counseling, the use of nicotine replacement products, and antidepressant therapy have helped smokers quit for good. in a person who has quit smoking, the chance of preventing lung cancer depends on how many years and how much the person smoked and the length of time since quitting. after a person has quit smoking for 10 years, the risk of lung cancer decreases 30% to 50%. see the following for more information on quitting smoking: - tobacco (includes help with quitting) - cigarette smoking: health risks and how to quit lower exposure to workplace risk factors laws that protect workers from being exposed to cancer-causing substances, such as asbestos, arsenic, nickel, and chromium, may help lower their risk of developing lung cancer. laws that prevent smoking in the workplace help lower the risk of lung cancer caused by secondhand smoke. lower exposure to radon lowering radon levels may lower the risk of lung cancer, especially among cigarette smokers. high levels of radon in homes may be reduced by taking steps to prevent radon leakage, such as sealing basements. it is not clear if the following decrease the risk of lung cancer: diet some studies show that people who eat high amounts of fruits or vegetables have a lower risk of lung cancer than those who eat low amounts. however, since smokers tend to have less healthy diets than nonsmokers, it is hard to know whether the decreased risk is from having a healthy diet or from not smoking. physical activity some studies show that people who are physically active have a lower risk of lung cancer than people who are not. however, since smokers tend to have different levels of physical activity than nonsmokers, it is hard to know if physical activity affects the risk of lung cancer. the following do not decrease the risk of lung cancer: beta carotene supplements in nonsmokers studies of nonsmokers show that taking beta carotene supplements does not lower their risk of lung cancer. vitamin e supplements studies show that taking vitamin e supplements does not affect the risk of lung cancer. cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. the purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. these may include eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. new ways to prevent lung cancer are being studied in clinical trials. clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. information about clinical trials can be found in the clinical trials section of the nci website. check the list of nci-supported cancer clinical trials for prevention trials for non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer that are now accepting patients. these include trials for quitting smoking.<end>
<question>how to prevent lung cancer ?<answer>key points - avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent lung cancer. - the following are risk factors for lung cancer: - cigarette, cigar, and pipe smoking - secondhand smoke - family history - hiv infection - environmental risk factors - beta carotene supplements in heavy smokers - the following are protective factors for lung cancer: - not smoking - quitting smoking - lower exposure to workplace risk factors - lower exposure to radon - it is not clear if the following decrease the risk of lung cancer: - diet - physical activity - the following do not decrease the risk of lung cancer: - beta carotene supplements in nonsmokers - vitamin e supplements - cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. - new ways to prevent lung cancer are being studied in clinical trials. avoiding risk factors and increasing protective factors may help prevent lung cancer. avoiding cancer risk factors may help prevent certain cancers. risk factors include smoking, being overweight, and not getting enough exercise. increasing protective factors such as quitting smoking and exercising may also help prevent some cancers. talk to your doctor or other health care professional about how you might lower your risk of cancer. the following are risk factors for lung cancer: cigarette, cigar, and pipe smoking tobacco smoking is the most important risk factor for lung cancer. cigarette, cigar, and pipe smoking all increase the risk of lung cancer. tobacco smoking causes about 9 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in men and about 8 out of 10 cases of lung cancer in women. studies have shown that smoking low tar or low nicotine cigarettes does not lower the risk of lung cancer. studies also show that the risk of lung cancer from smoking cigarettes increases with the number of cigarettes smoked per day and the number of years smoked. people who smoke have about 20 times the risk of lung cancer compared to those who do not smoke. secondhand smoke being exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke is also a risk factor for lung cancer. secondhand smoke is the smoke that comes from a burning cigarette or other tobacco product, or that is exhaled by smokers. people who inhale secondhand smoke are exposed to the same cancer -causing agents as smokers, although in smaller amounts. inhaling secondhand smoke is called involuntary or passive smoking. family history having a family history of lung cancer is a risk factor for lung cancer. people with a relative who has had lung cancer may be twice as likely to have lung cancer as people who do not have a relative who has had lung cancer. because cigarette smoking tends to run in families and family members are exposed to secondhand smoke, it is hard to know whether the increased risk of lung cancer is from the family history of lung cancer or from being exposed to cigarette smoke. hiv infection being infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), the cause of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), is linked with a higher risk of lung cancer. people infected with hiv may have more than twice the risk of lung cancer than those who are not infected. since smoking rates are higher in those infected with hiv than in those not infected, it is not clear whether the increased risk of lung cancer is from hiv infection or from being exposed to cigarette smoke. environmental risk factors - radiation exposure: being exposed to radiation is a risk factor for lung cancer. atomic bomb radiation, radiation therapy, imaging tests, and radon are sources of radiation exposure: - atomic bomb radiation: being exposed to radiation after an atomic bomb explosion increases the risk of lung cancer. - radiation therapy: radiation therapy to the chest may be used to treat certain cancers, including breast cancer and hodgkin lymphoma. radiation therapy uses x-rays, gamma rays, or other types of radiation that may increase the risk of lung cancer. the higher the dose of radiation received, the higher the risk. the risk of lung cancer following radiation therapy is higher in patients who smoke than in nonsmokers. - imaging tests: imaging tests, such as ct scans, expose patients to radiation. low-dose spiral ct scans expose patients to less radiation than higher dose ct scans. in lung cancer screening, the use of low-dose spiral ct scans can lessen the harmful effects of radiation. - radon: radon is a radioactive gas that comes from the breakdown of uranium in rocks and soil. it seeps up through the ground, and leaks into the air or water supply. radon can enter homes through cracks in floors, walls, or the foundation, and levels of radon can build up over time. studies show that high levels of radon gas inside the home or workplace increase the number of new cases of lung cancer and the number of deaths caused by lung cancer. the risk of lung cancer is higher in smokers exposed to radon than in nonsmokers who are exposed to it. in people who have never smoked, about 30% of deaths caused by lung cancer have been linked to being exposed to radon. - workplace exposure: studies show that being exposed to the following substances increases the risk of lung cancer: - asbestos. - arsenic. - chromium. - nickel. - beryllium. - cadmium. - tar and soot. these substances can cause lung cancer in people who are exposed to them in the workplace and have never smoked. as the level of exposure to these substances increases, the risk of lung cancer also increases. the risk of lung cancer is even higher in people who are exposed and also smoke. - air pollution: studies show that living in areas with higher levels of air pollution increases the risk of lung cancer. beta carotene supplements in heavy smokers taking beta carotene supplements (pills) increases the risk of lung cancer, especially in smokers who smoke one or more packs a day. the risk is higher in smokers who have at least one alcoholic drink every day. the following are protective factors for lung cancer: not smoking the best way to prevent lung cancer is to not smoke. quitting smoking smokers can decrease their risk of lung cancer by quitting. in smokers who have been treated for lung cancer, quitting smoking lowers the risk of new lung cancers. counseling, the use of nicotine replacement products, and antidepressant therapy have helped smokers quit for good. in a person who has quit smoking, the chance of preventing lung cancer depends on how many years and how much the person smoked and the length of time since quitting. after a person has quit smoking for 10 years, the risk of lung cancer decreases 30% to 50%. see the following for more information on quitting smoking: - tobacco (includes help with quitting) - cigarette smoking: health risks and how to quit lower exposure to workplace risk factors laws that protect workers from being exposed to cancer-causing substances, such as asbestos, arsenic, nickel, and chromium, may help lower their risk of developing lung cancer. laws that prevent smoking in the workplace help lower the risk of lung cancer caused by secondhand smoke. lower exposure to radon lowering radon levels may lower the risk of lung cancer, especially among cigarette smokers. high levels of radon in homes may be reduced by taking steps to prevent radon leakage, such as sealing basements. it is not clear if the following decrease the risk of lung cancer: diet some studies show that people who eat high amounts of fruits or vegetables have a lower risk of lung cancer than those who eat low amounts. however, since smokers tend to have less healthy diets than nonsmokers, it is hard to know whether the decreased risk is from having a healthy diet or from not smoking. physical activity some studies show that people who are physically active have a lower risk of lung cancer than people who are not. however, since smokers tend to have different levels of physical activity than nonsmokers, it is hard to know if physical activity affects the risk of lung cancer. the following do not decrease the risk of lung cancer: beta carotene supplements in nonsmokers studies of nonsmokers show that taking beta carotene supplements does not lower their risk of lung cancer. vitamin e supplements studies show that taking vitamin e supplements does not affect the risk of lung cancer. cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. the purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. these may include eating fruits and vegetables, exercising, quitting smoking, or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. new ways to prevent lung cancer are being studied in clinical trials. clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. information about clinical trials can be found in the clinical trials section of the nci website. check the list of nci-supported cancer clinical trials for prevention trials for non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer that are now accepting patients. these include trials for quitting smoking.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for alzheimer's disease ?<answer>currently there are no medicines that can slow the progression of ad. however, four fda-approved medications are used to treat ad symptoms. these drugs help individuals carry out the activities of daily living by maintaining thinking, memory, or speaking skills. they can also help with some of the behavioral and personality changes associated with ad. however, they will not stop or reverse ad and appear to help individuals for only a few months to a few years. donepezil (aricept), rivastigmine (exelon), and galantamine (razadyne) are prescribed to treat mild to moderate ad symptoms. donepezil was recently approved to treat severe ad as well. the newest ad medication is memantine (namenda), which is prescribed to treat moderate to severe ad symptoms.<end>
<question>how to diagnose alzheimer's disease ?<answer>the time from diagnosis of alzheimers disease to death varies. it can be as little as 3 or 4 years if the person is over 80 years old when diagnosed or as long as 10 years or more if the person is younger.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for alzheimer's disease ?<answer>clinical research is medical research involving people. it includes clinical studies, which observe and gather information about large groups of people. it also includes clinical trials, which test a medicine, therapy, medical device, or intervention in people to see if it is safe and effective. clinical trials are the best way to find out whether a particular intervention actually slows, delays, or prevents alzheimers disease. trials may compare a potential new treatment with a standard treatment or placebo (mock treatment). or, they may study whether a certain behavior or condition affects the progress of alzheimers or the chances of developing it. see the latest alzheimers disease progress report to read about results of nia-supported alzheimers research.<end>
<question>how to prevent alzheimer's disease ?<answer>currently, no medicines or treatments are known to prevent alzheimer's disease, but scientists are studying many possibilities. these possibilities include lifestyle factors such as exercise and physical activity, a healthy diet, and mentally stimulating activities. in addition to lifestyle factors, scientists have found clues that some long-term health conditions, like heart disease, high blood pressure, and diabetes, are related to alzheimer's disease. its possible that controlling these conditions will reduce the risk of developing alzheimers.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for colorectal cancer ?<answer>cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to prevent cancer. cancer prevention clinical trials are used to study ways to lower the risk of developing certain types of cancer. some cancer prevention trials are conducted with healthy people who have not had cancer but who have an increased risk for cancer. other prevention trials are conducted with people who have had cancer and are trying to prevent another cancer of the same type or to lower their chance of developing a new type of cancer. other trials are done with healthy volunteers who are not known to have any risk factors for cancer. the purpose of some cancer prevention clinical trials is to find out whether actions people take can prevent cancer. these may include exercising more or quitting smoking or taking certain medicines, vitamins, minerals, or food supplements. new ways to prevent colorectal cancer are being studied in clinical trials. clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. information about clinical trials can be found in the clinical trials section of the nci website. check nci's list of cancer clinical trials for colon cancer prevention trials or rectal cancer prevention trials that are now accepting patients.<end>
<question>what is (are) colorectal cancer ?<answer>several types of surgery are available for someone with colorectal cancer. if the cancer is found at a very early stage, the doctor may remove it without cutting through the abdominal wall. instead, the doctor may put a tube up the rectum into the colon and cut the cancer out. this is called a local excision. if the cancer is found in a polyp, which is a small bulging piece of tissue, the operation is called a polypectomy. if the cancer is larger, the surgeon will remove the cancer and a small amount of healthy tissue around it. this is called a colectomy. the surgeon may then sew the healthy parts of the colon together. usually, the surgeon will also remove lymph nodes near the colon and examine them under a microscope to see whether they contain cancer. if the doctor is not able to sew the two ends of the colon back together, an opening called a stoma is made on the abdomen for waste to pass out of the body before it reaches the rectum. this procedure is called a colostomy. sometimes the colostomy is needed only until the lower colon has healed, and then it can be reversed. but if the doctor needs to remove the entire lower colon, the colostomy may be permanent.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of colorectal cancer ?<answer>possible signs of colorectal cancer include: - a change in the frequency of bowel movements - diarrhea, constipation, or feeling that the bowel does not empty completely - either bright red or very dark blood in the stool a change in the frequency of bowel movements diarrhea, constipation, or feeling that the bowel does not empty completely either bright red or very dark blood in the stool - stools that are narrower than usual - general abdominal discomfort such as frequent gas pains, bloating, fullness, and/or cramps - weight loss with no known reason - constant tiredness - vomiting stools that are narrower than usual general abdominal discomfort such as frequent gas pains, bloating, fullness, and/or cramps weight loss with no known reason constant tiredness vomiting<end>
<question>what is (are) colorectal cancer ?<answer>key points - colorectal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the colon or the rectum. - colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death from cancer in the united states. - different factors increase or decrease the risk of getting colorectal cancer. colorectal cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the colon or the rectum. the colon and rectum are parts of the body's digestive system. the digestive system removes and processes nutrients (vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and water) from foods and helps pass waste material out of the body. the digestive system is made up of the mouth, throat, esophagus, stomach, and the small and large intestines. the colon (large bowel) is the first part of the large intestine and is about 5 feet long. together, the rectum and anal canal make up the last part of the large intestine and are 6-8 inches long. the anal canal ends at the anus (the opening of the large intestine to the outside of the body). cancer that begins in the colon is called colon cancer, and cancer that begins in the rectum is called rectal cancer. cancer that begins in either of these organs may also be called colorectal cancer. see the following pdq summaries for more information about colorectal cancer: - colorectal cancer prevention - colon cancer treatment - rectal cancer treatment - genetics of colorectal cancer colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of death from cancer in the united states. the number of new colorectal cancer cases and the number of deaths from colorectal cancer are decreasing a little bit each year. but in adults younger than 50 years, there has been a small increase in the number of new cases each year since 1998. colorectal cancer is found more often in men than in women.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of heart attack ?<answer>no. most heart attack patients do not have all of the symptoms. the important thing to remember is that if you have any of the symptoms and they grow more intense, and last more than 5 minutes, you should call 9-1-1 immediately.<end>
<question>how to diagnose heart attack ?<answer>your doctor will diagnose a heart attack based on your signs and symptoms, your medical and family histories, and test results. diagnostic tests ekg (electrocardiogram) an ekg is a simple, painless test that detects and records the heart's electrical activity. the test shows how fast the heart is beating and its rhythm (steady or irregular). an ekg also records the strength and timing of electrical signals as they pass through each part of the heart. an ekg can show signs of heart damage due to coronary heart disease (chd) and signs of a previous or current heart attack. blood tests during a heart attack, heart muscle cells die and release proteins into the bloodstream. blood tests can measure the amount of these proteins in the bloodstream. higher than normal levels of these proteins suggest a heart attack. commonly used blood tests include troponin tests, ck or ckmb tests, and serum myoglobin tests. blood tests often are repeated to check for changes over time. coronary angiography coronary angiography (an-jee-og-ra-fee) is a test that uses dye and special x rays to show the insides of your coronary arteries. this test often is done during a heart attack to help find blockages in the coronary arteries. to get the dye into your coronary arteries, your doctor will use a procedure called cardiac catheterization (kath-e-ter-ih-za-shun). a thin, flexible tube called a catheter is put into a blood vessel in your arm, groin (upper thigh), or neck. the tube is threaded into your coronary arteries, and the dye is released into your bloodstream. special x rays are taken while the dye is flowing through the coronary arteries. the dye lets your doctor study the flow of blood through the heart and blood vessels. if your doctor finds a blockage, he or she may recommend a procedure calledpercutaneous (per-ku-ta-ne-us) coronary intervention (pci), sometimes referred to ascoronary angioplasty(an-jee-oh-plas-tee). this procedure can help restore blood flow through a blocked artery. sometimes a small mesh tube called a stent is placed in the artery to help prevent blockages after the procedure.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of heart attack ?<answer>most heart attacks involve discomfort in the center of the chest that lasts more than a few minutes or goes away and comes back. the discomfort can feel like uncomfortable pressure, squeezing, fullness, or pain. it can include pain or numbness in one or both arms, the back, neck, jaw, or stomach. heart attack pain can sometimes feel like indigestion or heartburn. shortness of breath often happens along with, or before chest discomfort. other symptoms may include breaking out in a cold sweat, having nausea and vomiting, or feeling light-headed or dizzy. symptoms vary, and some people have no symptoms. know the symptoms of a heart attack so you can act fast to get treatment.<end>
<question>what is (are) heart attack ?<answer>espaol a heart attack happens when the flow of oxygen-rich blood to a section of heart muscle suddenly becomes blocked and the heart cant get oxygen. if blood flow isnt restored quickly, the section of heart muscle begins to die. heart attack treatment works best when its given right after symptoms occur. if you think you or someone else is having a heart attack, even if youre not sure, call 911 right away. overview heart attacks most often occur as a result of coronary heart disease (chd), also called coronary artery disease. chd is a condition in which a waxy substance called plaque builds up inside the coronary arteries. these arteries supply oxygen-rich blood to your heart. when plaque builds up in the arteries, the condition is called atherosclerosis. the buildup of plaque occurs over many years. eventually, an area of plaque can rupture (break open) inside of an artery. this causes a blood clot to form on the plaque's surface. if the clot becomes large enough, it can mostly or completely block blood flow through a coronary artery. if the blockage isn't treated quickly, the portion of heart muscle fed by the artery begins to die. healthy heart tissue is replaced with scar tissue. this heart damage may not be obvious, or it may cause severe or long-lasting problems. heart with muscle damage and a blocked artery a less common cause of heart attack is a severe spasm (tightening) of a coronary artery. the spasm cuts off blood flow through the artery. spasms can occur in coronary arteries that aren't affected by atherosclerosis. heart attacks can be associated with or lead to severe health problems, such as heart failure and life-threatening arrhythmias. heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. arrhythmias are irregular heartbeats. ventricular fibrillation is a life-threatening arrhythmia that can cause death if not treated right away. don't wait--get help quickly acting fast at the first sign of heart attack symptoms can save your life and limit damage to your heart. treatment works best when it's given right after symptoms occur. many people aren't sure what's wrong when they are having symptoms of a heart attack. some of the most common warning symptoms of a heart attack for both men and women are: chest pain or discomfort.most heart attacks involve discomfort in the center or left side of the chest. the discomfort usually lasts more than a few minutes or goes away and comes back. it can feel like pressure, squeezing, fullness, or pain. it also can feel like heartburn or indigestion. upper body discomfort.you may feel pain or discomfort in one or both arms, the back, shoulders, neck, jaw, or upper part of the stomach (above the belly button). shortness of breath.this may be your only symptom, or it may occur before or along with chest pain or discomfort. it can occur when you are resting or doing a little bit of physical activity. other possible symptoms of a heart attack include: breaking out in a cold sweat feeling unusually tired for no reason, sometimes for days (especially if you are a woman) nausea (feeling sick to the stomach) and vomiting light-headedness or sudden dizziness any sudden, new symptom or a change in the pattern of symptoms you already have (for example, if your symptoms become stronger or last longer than usual) not all heart attacks begin with the sudden, crushing chest pain that often is shown on tv or in the movies, or other common symptoms such as chest discomfort. the symptoms of a heart attack can vary from person to person. some people can have few symptoms and are surprised to learn they've had a heart attack. if you've already had a heart attack, your symptoms may not be the same for another one. quick action can save your life: call 911 if you think you or someone else may be having heart attack symptoms or a heart attack, don't ignore it or feel embarrassed to call for help. call 911 for emergency medical care. acting fast can save your life. do not drive to the hospital or let someone else drive you. call an ambulance so that medical personnel can begin life-saving treatment on the way to the emergency room. take a nitroglycerin pill if your doctor has prescribed this type of treatment.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by heart failure ?<answer>approximately 5 million people in the united states have heart failure. it contributes to 300,000 deaths each year. it is the number one cause of hospitalizations for people over the age of 65.<end>
<question>how to diagnose heart failure ?<answer>your doctor will diagnose heart failure based on your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and test results. the signs and symptoms of heart failure also are common in other conditions. thus, your doctor will: find out whether you have a disease or condition that can cause heart failure, such as coronary heart disease (chd), high blood pressure, or diabetes rule out other causes of your symptoms find any damage to your heart and check how well your heart pumps blood early diagnosis and treatment can help people who have heart failure live longer, more active lives. medical and family histories your doctor will ask whether you or others in your family have or have had a disease or condition that can cause heart failure. your doctor also will ask about your symptoms. he or she will want to know which symptoms you have, when they occur, how long you've had them, and how severe they are. your answers will help show whether and how much your symptoms limit your daily routine. physical exam during the physical exam, your doctor will: listen to your heart for sounds that aren't normal listen to your lungs for the sounds of extra fluid buildup look for swelling in your ankles, feet, legs, abdomen, and the veins in your neck diagnostic tests no single test can diagnose heart failure. if you have signs and symptoms of heart failure, your doctor may recommend one or more tests. your doctor also may refer you to a cardiologist. a cardiologist is a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and treating heart diseases and conditions. ekg (electrocardiogram) an ekg is a simple, painless test that detects and records the heart's electrical activity. the test shows how fast your heart is beating and its rhythm (steady or irregular). an ekg also records the strength and timing of electrical signals as they pass through your heart. an ekg may show whether the walls in your heart's pumping chambers are thicker than normal. thicker walls can make it harder for your heart to pump blood. an ekg also can show signs of a previous or current heart attack. chest x ray a chest x raytakes pictures of the structures inside your chest, such as your heart, lungs, and blood vessels. this test can show whether your heart is enlarged, you have fluid in your lungs, or you have lung disease. bnp blood test this test checks the level of a hormone in your blood called bnp. the level of this hormone rises during heart failure. echocardiography echocardiography (echo) uses sound waves to create a moving picture of your heart. the test shows the size and shape of your heart and how well your heart chambers and valves work. echo also can identify areas of poor blood flow to the heart, areas of heart muscle that aren't contracting normally, and heart muscle damage caused by lack of blood flow. echo might be done before and after a stress test (see below). a stress echo can show how well blood is flowing through your heart. the test also can show how well your heart pumps blood when it beats. doppler ultrasound a doppler ultrasound uses sound waves to measure the speed and direction of blood flow. this test often is done with echo to give a more complete picture of blood flow to the heart and lungs. doctors often use doppler ultrasound to help diagnose right-side heart failure. holter monitor a holter monitor records your heart's electrical activity for a full 24- or 48-hour period, while you go about your normal daily routine. you wear small patches called electrodes on your chest. wires connect the patches to a small, portable recorder. the recorder can be clipped to a belt, kept in a pocket, or hung around your neck. nuclear heart scan a nuclear heart scan shows how well blood is flowing through your heart and how much blood is reaching your heart muscle. during a nuclear heart scan, a safe, radioactive substance called a tracer is injected into your bloodstream through a vein. the tracer travels to your heart and releases energy. special cameras outside of your body detect the energy and use it to create pictures of your heart. a nuclear heart scan can show where the heart muscle is healthy and where it's damaged. a positron emission tomography (pet) scan is a type of nuclear heart scan. it shows the level of chemical activity in areas of your heart. this test can help your doctor see whether enough blood is flowing to these areas. a pet scan can show blood flow problems that other tests might not detect. cardiac catheterization during cardiac catheterization (kath-eh-ter-ih-za-shun), a long, thin, flexible tube called a catheter is put into a blood vessel in your arm, groin (upper thigh), or neck and threaded to your heart. this allows your doctor to look inside your coronary (heart) arteries. during this procedure, your doctor can check the pressure and blood flow in your heart chambers, collect blood samples, and use x rays to look at your coronary arteries. coronary angiography coronary angiography (an-jee-og-rah-fee) usually is done with cardiac catheterization. a dye that can be seen on x ray is injected into your bloodstream through the tip of the catheter. the dye allows your doctor to see the flow of blood to your heart muscle. angiography also shows how well your heart is pumping. stress test some heart problems are easier to diagnose when your heart is working hard and beating fast. during stress testing, you exercise to make your heart work hard and beat fast. you may walk or run on a treadmill or pedal a bicycle. if you can't exercise, you may be given medicine to raise your heart rate. heart tests, such as nuclear heart scanning and echo, often are done during stress testing. cardiac mri cardiac mri (magnetic resonance imaging) uses radio waves, magnets, and a computer to create pictures of your heart as it's beating. the test produces both still and moving pictures of your heart and major blood vessels. a cardiac mri can show whether parts of your heart are damaged. doctors also have used mri in research studies to find early signs of heart failure, even before symptoms appear. thyroid function tests thyroid function tests show how well your thyroid gland is working. these tests include blood tests, imaging tests, and tests to stimulate the thyroid. having too much or too little thyroid hormone in the blood can lead to heart failure.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of heart failure ?<answer>the most common symptoms of heart failure include shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, feeling tired, and swelling. swelling is caused by fluid build-up in the body. fluid buildup can lead to weight gain and frequent urination, as well as coughing.<end>
<question>what is (are) heart failure ?<answer>heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. in some cases, the heart can't fill with enough blood. in other cases, the heart can't pump blood to the rest of the body with enough force. some people have both problems. the term "heart failure" doesn't mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop working. however, heart failure is a serious condition that requires medical care. overview heart failure develops over time as the heart's pumping action grows weaker. the condition can affect the right side of the heart only, or it can affect both sides of the heart. most cases involve both sides of the heart. right-side heart failure occurs if the heart can't pump enough blood to the lungs to pick up oxygen. left-side heart failure occurs if the heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body. right-side heart failure may cause fluid to build up in the feet, ankles, legs, liver, abdomen, and the veins in the neck. right-side and left-side heart failure also may cause shortness of breath and fatigue (tiredness). the leading causes of heart failure are diseases that damage the heart. examples include coronary heart disease (chd), high blood pressure, and diabetes. outlook heart failure is a very common condition. about 5.7 million people in the united states have heart failure.both children and adults can have the condition, although the symptoms and treatments differ. the health topicfocuses on heart failure in adults. currently, heart failure has no cure. however, treatmentssuch as medicines and lifestyle changescan help people who have the condition live longer and more active lives. researchers continue to study new ways to treat heart failure and its complications.<end>
<question>what is (are) high blood cholesterol ?<answer>the coronary arteries bring blood to your heart. if plaque builds up in these arteries, the blood may not be able to bring enough oxygen to the heart muscle. this is called coronary heart disease.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of high blood cholesterol ?<answer>high blood cholesterol usually has no signs or symptoms. thus, many people don't know that their cholesterol levels are too high. if you're 20 years old or older, have your cholesterol levels checked at least once every 5 years. talk with your doctor about how often you should be tested.<end>
<question>what is (are) high blood cholesterol ?<answer>cholesterol can build up in the walls of your arteries. this buildup of cholesterol is called plaque. over time, the plaque can build up so much that the arteries become narrower. this is called atherosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries. it can slow down or block the flow of blood to your heart.<end>
<question>what is (are) high blood cholesterol ?<answer>tlc stands for therapeutic lifestyle changes. it is a set of lifestyle changes that can help you lower your ldl cholesterol. tlc has three main parts: a cholesterol-lowering diet, weight management, and physical activity. the tlc diet recommends - reducing the amount of saturated fat, trans fat, and cholesterol you eat. - eating only enough calories to achieve or maintain a healthy weight. - increasing the soluble fiber in your diet by eating foods such as oatmeal, kidney beans, and apples. - adding cholesterol-lowering foods, such as juices or margarines that contain plant sterols or stanols that lower cholesterol. reducing the amount of saturated fat, trans fat, and cholesterol you eat. eating only enough calories to achieve or maintain a healthy weight. increasing the soluble fiber in your diet by eating foods such as oatmeal, kidney beans, and apples. adding cholesterol-lowering foods, such as juices or margarines that contain plant sterols or stanols that lower cholesterol. weight management is an important part of tlc. losing weight if you are overweight can help lower ldl cholesterol. weight management is especially important for people who have a group of risk factors that includes high triglyceride and/or low hdl levels, being overweight, and having too large a waist. too large a waist is defined as a waist measurement of 40 inches or more for men and 35 inches or more for women. physical activity is another important part of tlc. regular physical activity is recommended for everyone. it can help raise hdl levels and lower ldl levels. it is especially important for people with high triglyceride and/or low hdl levels who are overweight and/or have a large waist measurement.<end>
<question>what is (are) high blood pressure ?<answer>abnormal blood pressure is higher than 120/80 mmhg. if either your systolic or diastolic blood pressure is higher than normal (120/80) but not high enough to be considered high blood pressure (140/90), you have pre-hypertension. pre-hypertension is a top number between 120 and 139 or a bottom number between 80 and 89 mmhg. for example, blood pressure readings of 138/82, 128/70, or 115/86 are all in the "pre-hypertension" range. (click the table on the right to see the stages of high blood pressure in adults.) the ranges in the table are blood pressure guides for adults who do not have any short-term serious illnesses. people with diabetes or chronic kidney disease should keep their blood pressure below 130/80 mmhg.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for high blood pressure ?<answer>today, many different types of medicines are available to control high blood pressure. these medicines work in different ways. some lower blood pressure by removing extra fluid and salt from your body. others affect blood pressure by slowing down the heartbeat, or by relaxing and widening blood vessels. often, two or more drugs work better than one. here are the types of medicines used to treat high blood pressure. - diuretics (water or fluid pills) flush excess sodium from your body, which reduces the amount of fluid in your blood and helps to lower your blood pressure. diuretics are often used with other high blood pressure medicines, sometimes in one combined pill. - beta blockers help your heart beat slower and with less force. as a result, your heart pumps less blood through your blood vessels, which can help to lower your blood pressure. - angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors. angiotensin-ii is a hormone that narrows blood vessels, increasing blood pressure. ace converts angiotensin i to angiotensin ii. ace inhibitors block this process, which stops the production of angiotensin ii, lowering blood pressure. - angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) block angiotensin ii hormone from binding with receptors in the blood vessels. when angiotensin ii is blocked, the blood vessels do not constrict or narrow, which can lower your blood pressure. - calcium channel blockers keep calcium from entering the muscle cells of your heart and blood vessels. this allows blood vessels to relax, which can lower your blood pressure. - alpha blockers reduce nerve impulses that tighten blood vessels. this allows blood to flow more freely, causing blood pressure to go down. - alpha-beta blockers reduce nerve impulses the same way alpha blockers do. however, like beta blockers, they also slow the heartbeat. as a result, blood pressure goes down. - central acting agents act in the brain to decrease nerve signals that narrow blood vessels, which can lower blood pressure. - vasodilators relax the muscles in blood vessel walls, which can lower blood pressure. diuretics (water or fluid pills) flush excess sodium from your body, which reduces the amount of fluid in your blood and helps to lower your blood pressure. diuretics are often used with other high blood pressure medicines, sometimes in one combined pill. beta blockers help your heart beat slower and with less force. as a result, your heart pumps less blood through your blood vessels, which can help to lower your blood pressure. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors. angiotensin-ii is a hormone that narrows blood vessels, increasing blood pressure. ace converts angiotensin i to angiotensin ii. ace inhibitors block this process, which stops the production of angiotensin ii, lowering blood pressure. angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) block angiotensin ii hormone from binding with receptors in the blood vessels. when angiotensin ii is blocked, the blood vessels do not constrict or narrow, which can lower your blood pressure. calcium channel blockers keep calcium from entering the muscle cells of your heart and blood vessels. this allows blood vessels to relax, which can lower your blood pressure. alpha blockers reduce nerve impulses that tighten blood vessels. this allows blood to flow more freely, causing blood pressure to go down. alpha-beta blockers reduce nerve impulses the same way alpha blockers do. however, like beta blockers, they also slow the heartbeat. as a result, blood pressure goes down. central acting agents act in the brain to decrease nerve signals that narrow blood vessels, which can lower blood pressure. vasodilators relax the muscles in blood vessel walls, which can lower blood pressure.<end>
<question>how to prevent high blood pressure ?<answer>you can take steps to help prevent high blood pressure by adopting these healthy lifestyle habits. - follow a healthy eating plan like dash (dietary approaches to stop hypertension), which emphasizes fruits, vegetables, fat-free and low-fat milk and milk products, and whole grains, fish, poultry, beans, seeds, and nuts, and choose and prepare foods with less sodium (salt). see how the dash diet (dietary approaches to stop hypertension) can help with blood pressure control. follow a healthy eating plan like dash (dietary approaches to stop hypertension), which emphasizes fruits, vegetables, fat-free and low-fat milk and milk products, and whole grains, fish, poultry, beans, seeds, and nuts, and choose and prepare foods with less sodium (salt). see how the dash diet (dietary approaches to stop hypertension) can help with blood pressure control. - be physically active for at least 2 and one-half hours a week. check out exercises to try for older adults, or visit go4life, the exercise and physical activity campaign from the national institute on aging. (watch the video to learn how exercise helps maintain healthy aging. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) be physically active for at least 2 and one-half hours a week. check out exercises to try for older adults, or visit go4life, the exercise and physical activity campaign from the national institute on aging. (watch the video to learn how exercise helps maintain healthy aging. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) - maintain a healthy weight and lose weight if you are overweight or obese. body mass index (bmi) and waist circumference are measures used to determine if someone is overweight or obese. see the bmi calculator to determine your body mass index. maintain a healthy weight and lose weight if you are overweight or obese. body mass index (bmi) and waist circumference are measures used to determine if someone is overweight or obese. see the bmi calculator to determine your body mass index. - if you drink alcoholic beverages, do so in moderation: no more than one drink a day for women, no more than two drinks a day for men. if you drink alcoholic beverages, do so in moderation: no more than one drink a day for women, no more than two drinks a day for men. - quit smoking, or don't start smoking. to get help quitting, call 1 (800) quit-now or check out quitting smoking for older adults. quit smoking, or don't start smoking. to get help quitting, call 1 (800) quit-now or check out quitting smoking for older adults. - learn to manage stress. learn about relaxation techniques that may relieve tension. learn to manage stress. learn about relaxation techniques that may relieve tension.<end>
<question>what causes high blood pressure ?<answer>changes, either fromgenesor the environment, in the bodys normal functions may cause high blood pressure, including changes to kidney fluid and salt balances, therenin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,sympathetic nervous systemactivity, and blood vessel structure and function. biology and high blood pressure researchers continue to study how various changes in normal body functions cause high blood pressure. the key functions affected in high blood pressure include: kidney fluid and salt balances renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system sympathetic nervous system activity blood vessel structure and function kidney fluid and salt balances the kidneys normally regulate the bodys salt balance by retaining sodium and water and excreting potassium. imbalances in this kidney function can expand blood volumes, which can cause high blood pressure. renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system makes angiotensin and aldosterone hormones. angiotensin narrows or constricts blood vessels, which can lead to an increase in blood pressure. aldosterone controls how the kidneys balance fluid and salt levels. increased aldosterone levels or activity may change this kidney function, leading to increased blood volumes and high blood pressure. sympathetic nervous system activity the sympathetic nervous system has important functions in blood pressure regulation, including heart rate, blood pressure, and breathing rate. researchers are investigating whether imbalances in this system cause high blood pressure. blood vessel structure and function changes in the structure and function of small and large arteries may contribute to high blood pressure. the angiotensin pathway and the immune system may stiffen small and large arteries, which can affect blood pressure. genetic causes of high blood pressure much of the understanding of the body systems involved in high blood pressure has come from genetic studies. high blood pressure often runs in families. years of research have identified many genes and other mutations associated with high blood pressure, some in the renal salt regulatory and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathways. however, these known genetic factors only account for 2 to 3percent of all cases. emerging research suggests that certain dna changes during fetal development also may cause the development of high blood pressure later in life. environmental causes of high blood pressure environmental causes of high blood pressure include unhealthy lifestyle habits, being overweight or obese, and medicines. unhealthy lifestyle habits unhealthy lifestyle habits can cause high blood pressure, including: high dietary sodium intake and sodium sensitivity drinking excess amounts of alcohol lack of physical activity overweight and obesity research studies show that being overweight or obese can increase the resistance in the blood vessels, causing the heart to work harder and leading to high blood pressure. medicines prescription medicines such as asthma or hormone therapies, including birth control pills and estrogen, and over-the-counter medicines such as cold relief medicines may cause this form of high blood pressure. this happens because medicines can change the way your body controls fluid and salt balances, cause your blood vessels to constrict, or impact the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system leading to high blood pressure. other medical causes of high blood pressure other medical causes of high blood pressure include other medical conditions such as chronic kidney disease, sleep apnea, thyroid problems, or certain tumors. this happens because these other conditions change the way your body controls fluids, sodium, and hormones in your blood, which leads to secondary high blood pressure.<end>
<question>what causes parkinson's disease ?<answer>parkinson's disease occurs when nerve cells, or neurons, in an area of the brain that controls movement die or become impaired. normally, these neurons produce an important brain chemical known as dopamine, but once the neurons become impaired, they produce less dopamine and eventually die. it is this shortage of dopamine that causes the movement problems of people with parkinson's.<end>
<question>what is (are) parkinson's disease ?<answer>deep brain stimulation, or dbs, is a surgical procedure used to treat a variety of disabling disorders. it is most commonly used to treat the debilitating symptoms of parkinsons disease. deep brain stimulation uses an electrode surgically implanted into part of the brain. the electrodes are connected under the skin to a small electrical device called a pulse generator, implanted in the chest. the generator and electrodes painlessly stimulate the brain to help stop many parkinson's symptoms such as tremor, bradykinesia, and rigidity. dbs is primarily used to stimulate one of three brain regions: the subthalamic nucleus, the globus pallidus, or the thalamus. researchers are exploring optimal generator settings for dbs, whether dbs of other brain regions will also improve symptoms of parkinsons disease, and also whether dbs may slow disease progression. deep brain stimulation usually reduces the need for levodopa and related drugs, which in turn decreases dyskinesias and other side effects. it also helps to relieve "on-off" fluctuation of symptoms. people who respond well to treatment with levodopa, even if only for a short period, tend to respond well to dbs.<end>
<question>what is (are) parkinson's disease ?<answer>a brain disorder parkinson's disease is a brain disorder that leads to shaking, stiffness, and difficulty with walking, balance, and coordination. it affects about half a million people in the united states although the numbers may be much higher. the average age of onset is 60 years, and the risk of developing parkinson's goes up with age. parkinson's disease was first described in 1817 by james parkinson, a british doctor who published a paper on what he called "the shaking palsy." in this paper, he described the major symptoms of the disease that would later bear his name. four main symptoms parkinson's disease belongs to a group of neurological conditions called movement disorders. the four main symptoms of parkinson's are: - tremor, or trembling in hands, arms, legs, jaw, or head - rigidity, or stiffness of the limbs and trunk - bradykinesia, or slowness of movement - postural instability, or impaired balance. tremor, or trembling in hands, arms, legs, jaw, or head rigidity, or stiffness of the limbs and trunk bradykinesia, or slowness of movement postural instability, or impaired balance. parkinson's symptoms usually begin gradually and get worse over time. as the symptoms become more severe, people with the disorder may have difficulty walking, talking, or completing other simple tasks. they also experience non-motor, or movement, symptoms including mental and behavioral changes, sleep problems, depression, memory difficulties, and fatigue. parkinson's disease not only affects the brain, but the entire body. while the brain involvement is responsible for the core features, other affected locations contribute to the complicated picture of parkinson's. parkinson's disease is both chronic, meaning it lasts for a long time, and progressive, meaning its symptoms grow worse over time. it is not contagious. diagnosis can be difficult about 60,000 americans are diagnosed with parkinson's disease each year. however, it's difficult to know exactly how many have it because many people in the early stages of the disease think their symptoms are due to normal aging and do not seek help from a doctor. also, diagnosis is sometimes difficult because there are no medical tests that can diagnose the disease with certainty and because other conditions may produce symptoms of parkinson's. for example, people with parkinson's may sometimes be told by their doctors that they have other disorders, and people with diseases similar to parkinson's may be incorrectly diagnosed as having parkinson's. a persons good response to the drug levodopa may support the diagnosis. levodopa is the main therapy for parkinsons disease. who is at risk? both men and women can have parkinsons disease. however, the disease affects about 50 percent more men than women. while the disease is more common in developed countries, studies also have found an increased risk of parkinson's disease in people who live in rural areas and in those who work in certain professions, suggesting that environmental factors may play a role in the disorder. researchers are focusing on additional risk factors for parkinsons disease. one clear risk factor for parkinson's is age. the average age of onset is 60 years and the risk rises significantly with advancing age. however, about 5 to 10 percent of people with parkinson's have "early-onset" disease which begins before the age of 50. early-onset forms of parkinson's are often inherited, though not always, and some have been linked to specific gene mutations. juvenile parkinsonism in very rare cases, parkinsonian symptoms may appear in people before the age of 20. this condition is called juvenile parkinsonism. it is most commonly seen in japan but has been found in other countries as well. it usually begins with dystonia (sustained muscle contractions causing twisting movements) and bradykinesia (slowness of movement), and the symptoms often improve with levodopa medication. juvenile parkinsonism often runs in families and is sometimes linked to a mutated gene. some cases are inherited evidence suggests that, in some cases, parkinsons disease may be inherited. an estimated 15 to 25 percent of people with parkinson's have a known relative with the disease. people with one or more close relatives who have parkinson's have an increased risk of developing the disease themselves, but the total risk is still just 2 to 5 percent unless the family has a known gene mutation for the disease. a gene mutation is a change or alteration in the dna or genetic material that makes up a gene. researchers have discovered several genes that are linked to parkinson's disease. the first to be identified was alpha-synuclein or snca. inherited cases of parkinsons disease are caused by mutations in the lrrk2, park2 or parkin, park7 or dj-1, pink1, or snca genes, or by mutations in genes that have not yet been identified.<end>
<question>what is the outlook for parkinson's disease ?<answer>pd is both chronic, meaning it persists over a long period of time, and progressive, meaning its symptoms grow worse over time. although some people become severely disabled, others experience only minor motor disruptions. tremor is the major symptom for some individuals, while for others tremor is only a minor complaint and other symptoms are more troublesome. it is currently not possible to predict which symptoms will affect an individual, and the intensity of the symptoms also varies from person to person.<end>
<question>what is the outlook for wilson disease ?<answer>early onset of the disease may foretell a worse prognosis than later onset. if the disorder is detected early and treated appropriately, an individual with wd can usually enjoy normal health and a normal lifespan. if not treated, however, wd can cause brain damage, liver failure, and death. the disease requires lifelong treatment.<end>
<question>what is (are) wilson disease ?<answer>the liver is the bodys largest internal organ. the liver is called the bodys metabolic factory because of the important role it plays in metabolismthe way cells change food into energy after food is digested and absorbed into the blood. the liver has many important functions, including - taking up, storing, and processing nutrients from foodincluding fat, sugar, and proteinand delivering them to the rest of the body when needed. - making new proteins, such as clotting factors and immune factors. - producing bile. in addition to carrying toxins and waste products out of the body, bile helps the body digest fats and the fat-soluble vitamins a, d, e, and k. - removing waste products the kidneys cannot remove, such as fats, cholesterol, toxins, and medications. a healthy liver is necessary for survival. the liver can regenerate most of its own cells when they become damaged. however, if injury to the liver is too severe or long lasting, regeneration is incomplete and the liver creates scar tissue.<end>
<question>what is (are) wilson disease ?<answer>wilson disease is a rare inherited disorder that prevents your body from getting rid of extra copper. you need a small amount of copper from food to stay healthy. too much copper is poisonous. normally, your liver releases extra copper into bile, a digestive fluid. with wilson disease, the copper builds up in your liver, and it releases the copper directly into your bloodstream. this can cause damage to your brain, kidneys, and eyes. wilson disease is present at birth, but symptoms usually start between ages 5 and 35. it first attacks the liver, the central nervous system or both. the most characteristic sign is a rusty brown ring around the cornea of the eye. a physical exam and laboratory tests can diagnose it. treatment is with drugs to remove the extra copper from your body. you need to take medicine and follow a low-copper diet for the rest of your life. don't eat shellfish or liver, as these foods may contain high levels of copper. at the beginning of treatment, you'll also need to avoid chocolate, mushrooms, and nuts. have your drinking water checked for copper content and don't take multivitamins that contain copper. with early detection and proper treatment, you can enjoy good health. nih: national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases<end>
<question>how to prevent wilson disease ?<answer>a person cannot prevent wilson disease; however, people with a family history of wilson disease, especially those with an affected sibling or parent, should talk with a health care provider about testing. a health care provider may be able to diagnose wilson disease before symptoms appear. early diagnosis and treatment of wilson disease can reduce or even prevent organ damage. people with a family history of the disease may also benefit from genetic testing that can identify one or more gene mutations. a health care provider may refer a person with a family history of wilson disease to a geneticista doctor who specializes in genetic diseases.<end>
<question>what is (are) age-related macular degeneration ?<answer>drusen are yellow deposits under the retina. they often are found in people over age 50. your eye care professional can detect drusen during a comprehensive dilated eye exam.<end>
<question>how to prevent age-related macular degeneration ?<answer>there is no reason for those diagnosed with early stage amd to take the areds formulation. the study did not find that the formulation helped those with early stage amd. if you have early stage amd, a comprehensive dilated eye exam every year can help determine if the disease is progressing. if early stage amd progresses to the intermediate stage, discuss taking the formulation with your doctor.<end>
<question>what is (are) age-related macular degeneration ?<answer>age-related macular degeneration, also known as amd, is an eye disease that affects the macula, a part of the retina. the retina sends light from the eye to the brain, and the macula allows you to see fine detail. amd blurs central vision amd blurs the sharp central vision you need for straight-ahead activities such as reading, sewing, and driving. amd causes no pain. how amd progresses in some cases, amd advances so slowly that people notice little change in their vision. in others, the disease progresses faster and may lead to a loss of vision in both eyes. amd is a common eye condition among people age 50 and older. it is a leading cause of vision loss in older adults. two forms of amd there are two forms of age-related macular degeneration -- dry and wet.<end>
<question>is age-related macular degeneration inherited ?<answer>age-related macular degeneration usually does not have a clear-cut pattern of inheritance, although the condition appears to run in families in some cases. an estimated 15 to 20 percent of people with age-related macular degeneration have at least one first-degree relative (such as a sibling) with the condition.<end>
<question>what is (are) leukemia ?<answer>leukemia is a cancer of the blood cells. it is the most common type of blood cancer and affects 10 times as many adults as children. most people diagnosed with leukemia are over 50 years old. leukemia starts in bone marrow leukemia usually begins in the bone marrow, the soft material in the center of most bones where blood cells are formed. the bone marrow makes three types of blood cells, and each type has a special function. - white blood cells fight infection and disease. - red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. - platelets help control bleeding by forming blood clots. white blood cells fight infection and disease. red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. platelets help control bleeding by forming blood clots. in people with leukemia, the bone marrow produces abnormal white blood cells, called leukemia cells. at first, leukemia cells function almost normally. but over time, as more leukemia cells are produced, they may crowd out the healthy white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets. this makes it difficult for the blood to carry out its normal functions. there are four common types of adult leukemia. two are chronic, meaning they get worse over a longer period of time. the other two are acute, meaning they get worse quickly. - chronic lymphocytic leukemia - chronic myeloid leukemia - acute myeloid leukemia - acute lymphocytic leukemia chronic lymphocytic leukemia chronic myeloid leukemia acute myeloid leukemia acute lymphocytic leukemia chronic and acute leukemia chronic lymphocytic leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, and acute myeloid leukemia are diagnosed more often in older adults. of these, chronic lymphocytic leukemia is the most common. acute lymphocytic leukemia is found more often in children. the symptoms for each type of leukemia differ but may include fevers, frequent infections, fatigue, swollen lymph nodes, weight loss, and bleeding and bruising easily. however, such symptoms are not sure signs of leukemia. an infection or another problem also could cause these symptoms. only a doctor can diagnose and treat the problem. (watch the video to learn how the rates of leukemia diagnosis vary by age. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) learn more about chronic lymphocytic leukemia. learn more about acute myeloid leukemia. other cancers that affect blood cells myeloma and lymphoma are other types of cancer that affect blood cells, but these cancer cells are rarely found in the blood stream. myeloma is the second most common form of blood cancer, and it affects plasma cells, a type of white blood cell that is found in the bone marrow. lymphoma accounts for about five percent of all the types of cancer in the united states. it starts in the lymphatic system, which is part of the body's immune system. both myeloma and lymphoma are more common among older adults and occur more often in men than women. learn more about myeloma. many treatments are available there are many methods available to treat acute and chronic leukemia, and there are many new treatments being developed that are rapidly changing how numerous types of leukemia are treated. the types of treatments depend on the specific disease and how best to treat it. some people receive a combination of treatments. acute leukemia usually needs to be treated right away. but there are many different kinds of acute leukemia. some respond well to treatment and can be cured in some cases, while others are more difficult to treat. treatment for chronic leukemia can often control the disease and its symptoms and there are new treatments being developed that may prolong survival. also, there are several treatments now available for chronic myeloid leukemia that can control the disease for a long time.<end>
<question>how to diagnose leukemia ?<answer>there are no standard or over-the-counter tests for leukemia. your doctor can request lab analyses for leukemia that include blood tests that check the levels and types of blood cells and look for changes in the shape of blood cells. the doctor may also look for signs of leukemia in the bone marrow or the fluid around the brain or the spinal cord<end>
<question>what is (are) leukemia ?<answer>acute leukemia gets worse quickly. in chronic leukemia, symptoms develop gradually and are generally not as severe as in acute leukemia.<end>
<question>who is at risk for leukemia? ?<answer>in many cases, no one knows why some people develop leukemia and others do not. however, scientists have identified some risk factors for the disease. a risk factor is anything that increases a person's chances of developing a disease. most people who have known risk factors do not get leukemia, while many who do get the disease have none of these risk factors. risk factors studies have identified the following risk factors for leukemia. - older age - male - white - working with certain chemicals - smoking - exposure to very high levels of radiation - certain health conditions - past treatment with chemotherapy or radiation therapy. older age male white working with certain chemicals smoking exposure to very high levels of radiation certain health conditions past treatment with chemotherapy or radiation therapy. more than 65 percent of people diagnosed with leukemia are over 55. disorders and genetic diseases certain disorders and genetic diseases, such as down syndrome, may increase the risk of leukemia. about 3 out of 10 people with a blood disorder known as myelodysplastic syndrome develop acute myeloid leukemia. in this disorder, as in leukemia, abnormal cells are formed in the bone marrow and too few healthy blood cells enter the bloodstream. radiation exposure people exposed to very high levels of radiation, such as the atomic bomb blast in hiroshima, japan or nuclear power plant accidents, also are at risk of developing leukemia. studies of atomic blasts have estimated that survivors have a five and a half times greater risk of developing leukemia than the general public. cancer treatments chemotherapy and radiation therapy have been helpful to a lot of people in the treatment of many forms of cancer, and indeed are often lifesaving. however, these therapies have been linked to the development of second cancers, including leukemia, many years after treatment, particularly in people who received intensive therapy early in their lives. chemotherapy for a first cancer is a stronger risk factor for developing leukemia later than is radiation therapy. the combination of chemotherapy and radiation can significantly increase the risk of leukemia after a first cancer. powerful cancer-fighting chemotherapy drugs, known as alkylating agents and epipodophyllotoxins, have been associated with leukemia. the dose given and length of treatment as well as other factors may contribute to a person's risk of developing leukemia. acute myeloid leukemia is the most common type of cancer that has been linked to chemotherapy treatment. radiation therapy may increase a person's chance of developing leukemia. several factors influence this risk, such as the dose of radiation administered. a person's age at the time of therapy does not seem to be a risk factor for leukemia. recently, researchers have gained a much greater understanding of the risk of second cancers due to earlier treatment exposures. they have been able to limit the effective doses given in primary cases so as to reduce the risk of a recurrence or second cancer.<end>
<question>what is (are) osteoporosis ?<answer>a bone disease osteoporosis is a disease that thins and weakens the bones to the point that they become fragile and break easily. women and men with osteoporosis most often break bones in the hip, spine, and wrist, but any bone can be affected. you can't "catch" osteoporosis or give it to someone else. in the united states, more than 53 million people either already have osteoporosis or are at high risk due to low bone mass, placing them at risk for more serious bone loss and fractures. although osteoporosis can strike at any age, it is most common among older people, especially older women. how bone loss occurs bone is living tissue. throughout our lives, the body breaks down old bone and replaces it with new bone. but as people age, more bone is broken down than is replaced. the inside of a bone normally looks like a honeycomb, but when a person has osteoporosis, the spaces inside this honeycomb become larger, reflecting the loss of bone density and strength. (the word "osteoporosis" means "porous bone.") the outside of long bones -- called the cortex -- also thins, further weakening the bone. sometime around the age of 30, bone mass stops increasing, and the goal for bone health is to keep as much bone as possible for as long as you can. in most women, the rate of bone loss increases for several years after menopause, then slows down again, but continues. in men, the bone loss occurs more slowly. but by age 65 or 70, most men and women are losing bone at the same rate. weak bones can lead to fractures osteoporosis is often called "silent" because bone loss occurs without symptoms. people may not know that they have osteoporosis until a sudden strain, bump, or fall causes a bone to break. this can result in a trip to the hospital, surgery, and possibly a long-term disabling condition. broken bones in your spine are painful and very slow to heal. people with weak bones in their spine gradually lose height and their posture becomes hunched over. over time a bent spine can make it hard to walk or even sit up. broken hips are a very serious problem as we age. they greatly increase the risk of death, especially during the year after they break. people who break a hip might not recover for months or even years. because they often cannot care for themselves, they are more likely to have to live in a nursing home. prevention and treatment the good news is that osteoporosis can often be prevented and treated. healthy lifestyle choices such as proper diet, exercise, and treatment medications can help prevent further bone loss and reduce the risk of fractures.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for osteoporosis ?<answer>a comprehensive osteoporosis treatment program includes a focus on proper nutrition, exercise, and safety issues to prevent falls that may result in fractures. in addition, your doctor may prescribe a medication to slow or stop bone loss, increase bone density, and reduce fracture risk. nutrition. the foods we eat contain a variety of vitamins, minerals, and other important nutrients that help keep our bodies healthy. all of these nutrients are needed in balanced proportion. in particular, calcium and vitamin d are needed for strong bones and for your heart, muscles, and nerves to function properly. exercise. exercise is an important component of an osteoporosis prevention and treatment program. exercise not only improves your bone health, but it increases muscle strength, coordination, and balance, and leads to better overall health. although exercise is good for someone with osteoporosis, it should not put any sudden or excessive strain on your bones. as extra insurance against fractures, your doctor can recommend specific exercises to strengthen and support your back. therapeutic medications. several medications are available for the prevention and/or treatment of osteoporosis, including: bisphosphonates; estrogen agonists/antagonists (also called selective estrogen receptor modulators or serms); calcitonin; parathyroid hormone; estrogen therapy; hormone therapy; and a recently approved rank ligand (rankl) inhibitor. (watch the video to learn how exercise helped a 70-year-old woman with osteoporosis. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.)<end>
<question>what is (are) osteoporosis ?<answer>consider talking to your doctor about being evaluated for osteoporosis if - you are a man or woman over age 50 or a postmenopausal woman and you break a bone - you are a woman age 65 or older - you are a woman younger than 65 and at high risk for fractures - you have lost height, developed a stooped or hunched posture, or experienced sudden back pain with no apparent cause - you have been taking glucocorticoid medications such as prednisone, cortisone, or dexamethasone for 2 months or longer or are taking other medications known to cause bone loss - you have a chronic illness or are taking a medication that is known to cause bone loss - you have anorexia nervosa or a history of this eating disorder. - you are a premenopausal woman, not pregnant, and your menstrual periods have stopped, are irregular, or never started when you reached puberty. you are a man or woman over age 50 or a postmenopausal woman and you break a bone you are a woman age 65 or older you are a woman younger than 65 and at high risk for fractures you have lost height, developed a stooped or hunched posture, or experienced sudden back pain with no apparent cause you have been taking glucocorticoid medications such as prednisone, cortisone, or dexamethasone for 2 months or longer or are taking other medications known to cause bone loss you have a chronic illness or are taking a medication that is known to cause bone loss you have anorexia nervosa or a history of this eating disorder. you are a premenopausal woman, not pregnant, and your menstrual periods have stopped, are irregular, or never started when you reached puberty. here is how to find an appropriate health care professional to treat osteoporosis.<end>
<question>who is at risk for osteoporosis? ?<answer>risk factors you can't change some risk factors for osteoporosis cannot be changed. these include - gender. women are at higher risk for osteoporosis than men. they have smaller bones and lose bone more rapidly than men do because of hormone changes that occur after menopause. therefore, if you are a woman, you are at higher risk for osteoporosis. - age. because bones become thinner with age, the older you are, the greater your risk of osteoporosis. - ethnicity. caucasian and asian women are at the highest risk for osteoporosis. this is mainly due to differences in bone mass and density compared with other ethnic groups. african-american and hispanic women are also at risk, but less so. - family history. osteoporosis tends to run in families. if a family member has osteoporosis or breaks a bone, there is a greater chance that you will too. - history of previous fracture. people who have had a fracture after the age of 50 are at high risk of having another. gender. women are at higher risk for osteoporosis than men. they have smaller bones and lose bone more rapidly than men do because of hormone changes that occur after menopause. therefore, if you are a woman, you are at higher risk for osteoporosis. age. because bones become thinner with age, the older you are, the greater your risk of osteoporosis. ethnicity. caucasian and asian women are at the highest risk for osteoporosis. this is mainly due to differences in bone mass and density compared with other ethnic groups. african-american and hispanic women are also at risk, but less so. family history. osteoporosis tends to run in families. if a family member has osteoporosis or breaks a bone, there is a greater chance that you will too. history of previous fracture. people who have had a fracture after the age of 50 are at high risk of having another. risk factors you can change there are other risk factors for osteoporosis that can be changed. - poor diet. getting too little calcium over your lifetime can increase your risk for osteoporosis. not getting enough vitamin d -- either from your diet, supplements, or sunlight -- can also increase your risk for osteoporosis. vitamin d is important because it helps the body absorb calcium. an overall diet adequate in protein and other vitamins and minerals is also essential for bone health. - physical inactivity. not exercising and being inactive or staying in bed for long periods can increase your risk of developing osteoporosis. like muscles, bones become stronger with exercise. - smoking. cigarette smokers may absorb less calcium from their diets. in addition, women who smoke have lower levels of estrogen in their bodies. learn more about smoking and bone health. poor diet. getting too little calcium over your lifetime can increase your risk for osteoporosis. not getting enough vitamin d -- either from your diet, supplements, or sunlight -- can also increase your risk for osteoporosis. vitamin d is important because it helps the body absorb calcium. an overall diet adequate in protein and other vitamins and minerals is also essential for bone health. physical inactivity. not exercising and being inactive or staying in bed for long periods can increase your risk of developing osteoporosis. like muscles, bones become stronger with exercise. smoking. cigarette smokers may absorb less calcium from their diets. in addition, women who smoke have lower levels of estrogen in their bodies. learn more about smoking and bone health. - medications. some commonly used medicines can cause loss of bone mass. these include a type of steroid called glucocorticoids, which are used to control diseases such as arthritis and asthma; some antiseizure drugs; some medicines that treat endometriosis; and some cancer drugs. using too much thyroid hormone for an underactive thyroid can also be a problem. talk to your doctor about the medications you are taking and what you can do to protect your bones. - low body weight. women who are thin -- and small-boned -- are at greater risk for osteoporosis. medications. some commonly used medicines can cause loss of bone mass. these include a type of steroid called glucocorticoids, which are used to control diseases such as arthritis and asthma; some antiseizure drugs; some medicines that treat endometriosis; and some cancer drugs. using too much thyroid hormone for an underactive thyroid can also be a problem. talk to your doctor about the medications you are taking and what you can do to protect your bones. low body weight. women who are thin -- and small-boned -- are at greater risk for osteoporosis. use this checklist to find out if you are at risk for weak bones. many of these risk factors, both ones you can change and ones you cannot change, affect peak bone mass, which is when your bones achieve maximum strength and density. because high peak bone density can reduce osteoporosis risk later in life, it makes sense to pay more attention to those factors that affect peak bone mass. learn more about peak bone mass.<end>
<question>what is (are) shingles ?<answer>shingles is a painful rash that develops on one side of the face or body. the rash forms blisters that typically scab over in 7 to 10 days and clear up within 2 to 4 weeks. most commonly, the rash occurs in a single stripe around either the left or the right side of the body. in other cases, the rash occurs on one side of the face. in rare cases (usually among people with weakened immune systems), the rash may be more widespread and look similar to a chickenpox rash. shingles is very common. fifty percent of all americans will have had shingles by the time they are 80. while shingles occurs in people of all ages, it is most common in 60- to 80-year-olds. in fact, one out of every three people 60 years or older will get shingles. (watch the video to learn more about shingles. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) what causes shingles? shingles is caused by a reactivation of the chickenpox virus. it is distinctive because it affects only one side of the body. the early signs of shingles usually develop in three stages: severe pain or tingling, possibly itchy rash, and blisters that look like chickenpox. the virus that causes shingles is a herpes virus, (another name for shingles is herpes zoster.) once you are infected with this kind of virus, it remains in your body for life. it stays inactive until a period when your immunity is down. shingles and pain the most common complication of shingles is pain -- a condition called post-herpetic neuralgia (phn). people with phn have severe pain in the areas where they had the shingles rash, even after the rash clears up. in most patients, the pain usually clears up in a few weeks or months, but some people can have pain from phn for years. persistent pain from shingles is a common symptom in people over 60. in fact, one out of six people older than 60 years who get shingles will have severe pain. as people get older, they are more likely to develop long-term pain as a complication of shingles and the pain is likely to be more severe. other complications shingles may also lead to other serious complications. - outbreaks that start on the face or eyes can cause vision or hearing problems. even permanent blindness can result if the cornea of the eye is affected. - bacterial infection of the open sores can lead to scarring. outbreaks that start on the face or eyes can cause vision or hearing problems. even permanent blindness can result if the cornea of the eye is affected. bacterial infection of the open sores can lead to scarring. - in a very small number of cases, bacteria can cause more serious conditions, including toxic shock syndrome and necrotizing fasciitis, a severe infection that destroys the soft tissue under the skin. - the burning waves of pain, loss of sleep, and interference with even basic life activities can cause serious depression. - in patients with immune deficiency, the rash can be much more extensive than usual and the illness can be complicated by pneumonia. these cases are more serious, but they are rarely fatal. - very rarely, shingles can also lead to pneumonia, brain inflammation (encephalitis), or death. in a very small number of cases, bacteria can cause more serious conditions, including toxic shock syndrome and necrotizing fasciitis, a severe infection that destroys the soft tissue under the skin. the burning waves of pain, loss of sleep, and interference with even basic life activities can cause serious depression. in patients with immune deficiency, the rash can be much more extensive than usual and the illness can be complicated by pneumonia. these cases are more serious, but they are rarely fatal. very rarely, shingles can also lead to pneumonia, brain inflammation (encephalitis), or death. shingles usually does not return people who develop shingles usually have only one episode in their lifetime. however, a person can have a second or even a third episode. the shingles vaccine adults 60 years old or older should talk to their healthcare professional about getting a one-time dose of the shingles vaccine. the vaccine can reduce your risk of shingles and the long-term pain it can cause. if you have already had shingles or you have a chronic medical condition, you can receive the shingles vaccine. (see more about the shingles vaccine in the chapter prevention.) is shingles contagious? shingles cannot be passed from one person to another. however, the virus that causes shingles, the varicella zoster virus, can be spread from a person with active shingles to another person who has never had chickenpox. in such cases, the person exposed to the virus might develop chickenpox, but they would not develop shingles. the virus is spread through direct contact with fluid from the rash blisters caused by shingles. a person with active shingles can spread the virus when the rash is in the blister phase. a person is not infectious before the blisters appear. once the rash has developed crusts, the person is no longer contagious. shingles is less contagious than chickenpox and the risk of a person with shingles spreading the virus is low if the rash is covered. if you have shingles if you have shingles, - keep the rash covered - avoid touching or scratching the rash - wash your hands often to prevent the spread of varicella zoster virus. keep the rash covered avoid touching or scratching the rash wash your hands often to prevent the spread of varicella zoster virus. until your rash has developed crusts, avoid contact with - pregnant women who have never had chickenpox or the chickenpox vaccine - premature or low birth weight infants - people with weakened immune systems, such as people receiving immunosuppressive medications or undergoing chemotherapy, organ transplant recipients, and people with human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection. pregnant women who have never had chickenpox or the chickenpox vaccine premature or low birth weight infants people with weakened immune systems, such as people receiving immunosuppressive medications or undergoing chemotherapy, organ transplant recipients, and people with human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection. if you have not had chickenpox and you come into contact with someone who has shingles, ask your healthcare provider whether you should get a chickenpox vaccination. to learn more, see "what you need to know about shingles and the shingles vaccine."<end>
<question>what is (are) shingles ?<answer>shingles (herpes zoster) is an outbreak of rash or blisters on the skin that is caused by the same virus that causes chickenpox the varicella-zoster virus. the first sign of shingles is often burning or tingling pain (which can be severe), or sometimes numbness or itch,generally on one side of the body. after several days or a week, a rash of fluid-filled blisters, similar to chickenpox, appears in one area on one side of the body. shingles pain can be mild or intense. some people have mostly itching; some feel pain from the gentlest touch or breeze. the most common location for shingles is a band, called a dermatome, spanning one side of the trunk around the waistline. anyone who has had chickenpox is at risk for shingles. scientists think that some of the virus particles from the original exposure to the varicella-zoster virus,leave the skin blisters and move into the nervous system. when the varicella-zoster virus reactivates, the virus moves back down the long nerve fibers that extend from the sensory cell bodies to the skin. the viruses multiply, the tell-tale rash erupts, and the person now has shingles.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for shingles ?<answer>treatment with antiviral medications can reduce the severity of the nerve damage and speed healing. but to be effective, they must be started as soon as possible after the rash appears. if you suspect you have shingles, see your healthcare provider within 72 hours of the first sign of the rash. at the early stage of shingles, a healthcare provider will usually prescribe antiviral pills. these antiviral medicines include acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famcyclovir, your healthcare provider, may also prescribe drugs to relieve pain. wet compresses, calamine lotion, and colloidal oatmeal baths may help relieve some of the itching. patients with long-term pain may also be treated with numbing patches, tricyclic antidepressants, and gabapentin, an anti-seizure medication. the shingles vaccine is not recommended if you have active shingles or pain that continues after the rash is gone. while these treatments can reduce the symptoms of shingles, they are not a cure. the antivirals do weaken the virus and its effects, but the outbreak still tends to run its course. good hygiene, including daily bathing, can help prevent bacterial infections. it is a good idea to keep fingernails clean and well-trimmed to reduce scratching.<end>
<question>what causes shingles ?<answer>caused by a virus shingles is caused by a virus called varicella-zoster virus -- the one that gave you chickenpox when you were a child. as you recovered from chickenpox, the sores healed and the other symptoms went away, but the virus remained. it is with you for life. the virus hides out in nerve cells, usually in the spine. but it can become active again. somehow, the virus gets a signal that your immunity has become weakened. this triggers the reactivation. when the virus becomes active again, it follows a nerve path called a dermatome. the nerve path begins at specific points in the spine, continues around one side of the body, and surfaces at the nerve endings in the skin. the pattern of the rash reflects the location of that nerve path. risk factors the leading risk factor for shingles is a history of having had chickenpox. one out of every five people who have had chickenpox is likely to get shingles. another risk factor is aging. as we age, our natural immunity gradually loses its ability to protect against infection. the shingles virus can take advantage of this and become active again. conditions that weaken the immune system can also put people at risk for shingles. shingles is especially dangerous for anyone who has had cancer, radiation treatments for cancer, hiv/aids, or a transplant operation. stress is another factor that may contribute to outbreaks. while stress alone does not cause the outbreaks, shingles often occurs in people who have recently had a stressful event in their lives. most cases of shingles occur in adults. only about 5 percent of cases occur in children. with children, immune deficiency is the primary risk factor, but children who had chickenpox before they were one year old may also get shingles before they become adults. there have been studies of adults who had chickenpox as children and were later exposed to children who had chickenpox. interestingly, that exposure apparently boosted the adult's immunity, which actually helped them avoid getting shingles later in life.<end>
<question>what is (are) polycythemia vera ?<answer>key points - polycythemia vera is a disease in which too many red blood cells are made in the bone marrow. - symptoms of polycythemia vera include headaches and a feeling of fullness below the ribs on the left side. - special blood tests are used to diagnose polycythemia vera. polycythemia vera is a disease in which too many red blood cells are made in the bone marrow. in polycythemia vera, the blood becomes thickened with too many red blood cells. the number of white blood cells and platelets may also increase. these extra blood cells may collect in the spleen and cause it to swell. the increased number of red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets in the blood can cause bleeding problems and make clots form in blood vessels. this can increase the risk of stroke or heart attack. in patients who are older than 65 years or who have a history of blood clots, the risk of stroke or heart attack is higher. patients also have an increased risk of acute myeloid leukemia or primary myelofibrosis.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to polycythemia vera ?<answer>mutations in the jak2 and tet2 genes are associated with polycythemia vera. although it remains unclear exactly what initiates polycythemia vera, researchers believe that it begins when mutations occur in the dna of a hematopoietic stem cell. these stem cells are located in the bone marrow and have the potential to develop into red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. jak2 gene mutations seem to be particularly important for the development of polycythemia vera, as nearly all affected individuals have a mutation in this gene. the jak2 gene provides instructions for making a protein that promotes the growth and division (proliferation) of cells. the jak2 protein is especially important for controlling the production of blood cells from hematopoietic stem cells. jak2 gene mutations result in the production of a jak2 protein that is constantly turned on (constitutively activated), which increases production of blood cells and prolongs their survival. with so many extra cells in the bloodstream, abnormal blood clots are more likely to form. thicker blood also flows more slowly throughout the body, which prevents organs from receiving enough oxygen. many of the signs and symptoms of polycythemia vera are related to a shortage of oxygen in body tissues. the function of the tet2 gene is unknown. although mutations in the tet2 gene have been found in approximately 16 percent of people with polycythemia vera, it is unclear what role these mutations play in the development of the condition.<end>
<question>what is (are) polycythemia vera ?<answer>polycythemia vera is a condition characterized by an increased number of red blood cells in the bloodstream. affected individuals may also have excess white blood cells and blood clotting cells called platelets. these extra cells cause the blood to be thicker than normal. as a result, abnormal blood clots are more likely to form and block the flow of blood through arteries and veins. individuals with polycythemia vera have an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis (dvt), a type of blood clot that occurs in the deep veins of the arms or legs. if a dvt travels through the bloodstream and lodges in the lungs, it can cause a life-threatening clot known as a pulmonary embolism (pe). affected individuals also have an increased risk of heart attack and stroke caused by blood clots in the heart and brain. polycythemia vera typically develops in adulthood, around age 60, although in rare cases it occurs in children and young adults. this condition may not cause any symptoms in its early stages. some people with polycythemia vera experience headaches, dizziness, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), impaired vision, or itchy skin. affected individuals frequently have reddened skin because of the extra red blood cells. other complications of polycythemia vera include an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly), stomach ulcers, gout (a form of arthritis caused by a buildup of uric acid in the joints), heart disease, and cancer of blood-forming cells (leukemia).<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of polycythemia vera ?<answer>symptoms of polycythemia vera include headaches and a feeling of fullness below the ribs on the left side. polycythemia vera often does not cause early signs or symptoms. it may be found during a routine blood test. signs and symptoms may occur as the number of blood cells increases. other conditions may cause the same signs and symptoms. check with your doctor if you have any of the following: - a feeling of pressure or fullness below the ribs on the left side. - headaches. - double vision or seeing dark or blind spots that come and go. - itching all over the body, especially after being in warm or hot water. - reddened face that looks like a blush or sunburn. - weakness. - dizziness. - weight loss for no known reason.<end>
<question>what is (are) diabetes ?<answer>too much glucose in the blood diabetes means your blood glucose (often called blood sugar) is too high. your blood always has some glucose in it because your body needs glucose for energy to keep you going. but too much glucose in the blood isn't good for your health. glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles. your blood carries the glucose to all of the cells in your body. insulin is a chemical (a hormone) made by the pancreas. the pancreas releases insulin into the blood. insulin helps the glucose from food get into your cells. if your body does not make enough insulin or if the insulin doesn't work the way it should, glucose can't get into your cells. it stays in your blood instead. your blood glucose level then gets too high, causing pre-diabetes or diabetes. types of diabetes there are three main kinds of diabetes: type 1, type 2, and gestational diabetes. the result of type 1 and type 2 diabetes is the same: glucose builds up in the blood, while the cells are starved of energy. over the years, high blood glucose damages nerves and blood vessels, oftentimes leading to complications such as heart disease, stroke, blindness, kidney disease, nerve problems, gum infections, and amputation. type 1 diabetes type 1 diabetes, which used to be called called juvenile diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes, develops most often in young people. however, type 1 diabetes can also develop in adults. with this form of diabetes, your body no longer makes insulin or doesnt make enough insulin because your immune system has attacked and destroyed the insulin-producing cells. about 5 to 10 percent of people with diabetes have type 1 diabetes. to survive, people with type 1 diabetes must have insulin delivered by injection or a pump. learn more about type 1 diabetes here. type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes, which used to be called adult-onset diabetes or non insulin-dependent diabetes, is the most common form of diabetes. although people can develop type 2 diabetes at any age -- even during childhood -- type 2 diabetes develops most often in middle-aged and older people. type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistancea condition that occurs when fat, muscle, and liver cells do not use insulin to carry glucose into the bodys cells to use for energy. as a result, the body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells. at first, the pancreas keeps up with the added demand by making more insulin. over time, the pancreas doesnt make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase, such as after meals. if your pancreas can no longer make enough insulin, you will need to treat your type 2 diabetes. learn more about type 2 diabetes here. gestational diabetes some women develop gestational diabetes during the late stages of pregnancy. gestational diabetes is caused by the hormones of pregnancy or a shortage of insulin. although this form of diabetes usually goes away after the baby is born, a woman who has had it and her child are more likely to develop diabetes later in life. prediabetes prediabetes means your blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough for a diagnosis of diabetes. people with prediabetes are at an increased risk for developing type 2 diabetes and for heart disease and stroke. the good news is that if you have prediabetes, you can reduce your risk of getting type 2 diabetes. with modest weight loss and moderate physical activity, you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes. learn more about prediabetes here. signs of diabetes many people with diabetes experience one or more symptoms, including extreme thirst or hunger, a frequent need to urinate and/or fatigue. some lose weight without trying. additional signs include sores that heal slowly, dry, itchy skin, loss of feeling or tingling in the feet and blurry eyesight. some people with diabetes, however, have no symptoms at all. how many have diabetes? nearly 29 million americans age 20 or older (12.3 percent of all people in this age group) have diabetes, according to 2014 estimates from the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc). about 1.9 million people aged 20 years or older were newly diagnosed with diabetes in 2010 alone. people can get diabetes at any age, but the risk increases as we get older. in 2014, over 11 million older adults living in the u.s -- nearly 26 percent of people 65 or older -- had diabetes. see more statistics about diabetes from the national diabetes statistics report 2014. (centers for disease control and prevention.) if diabetes is not managed diabetes is a very serious disease. over time, diabetes that is not well managed causes serious damage to the eyes, kidneys, nerves, heart, gums and teeth. if you have diabetes, you are more likely than people without diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke. people with diabetes also tend to develop heart disease or stroke at an earlier age than others. the best way to protect yourself from the serious complications of diabetes is to manage your blood glucose, blood pressure and cholesterol and to avoid smoking. it is not always easy, but people who make an ongoing effort to manage their diabetes can greatly improve their overall health.<end>
<question>what is (are) diabetes ?<answer>people with diabetes should - do aerobic activities, such as brisk walking, which use the bodys large muscles to make the heart beat faster. the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head, shoulder, and hip movements. - do activities to strengthen muscles and bone, such as sit-ups or lifting weights. aim for two times a week. - stretch to increase flexibility, lower stress, and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity. do aerobic activities, such as brisk walking, which use the bodys large muscles to make the heart beat faster. the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head, shoulder, and hip movements. do activities to strengthen muscles and bone, such as sit-ups or lifting weights. aim for two times a week. stretch to increase flexibility, lower stress, and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity. try to exercise almost every day for a total of about 30 minutes. if you haven't exercised lately, begin slowly. start with 5 to 10 minutes, and then add more time. or exercise for 10 minutes, three times a day. (tip: you dont need to get your exercise in all at one time.) for more information on exercise and older adults, see exercises to try or visit go4life, the exercise and physical activity campaign from the national institute on aging. always talk with a doctor before starting a new physical activity program.<end>
<question>what is (are) diabetes ?<answer>heart disease and stroke are the leading causes of death for people with diabetes. controlling the abcs of diabetes -- your blood glucose, your blood pressure, and your cholesterol, as well as stopping smoking -- can help prevent these and other complications from diabetes. - a is for the a1c test - b is for blood pressure - c is for cholesterol. a is for the a1c test b is for blood pressure c is for cholesterol. - the a1c test (a-one-c) shows you what your blood glucose has been over the last three months. your health care provider does this test to see what your blood glucose level is most of the time. this test should be done at least twice a year for all people with diabetes and for some people more often as needed. for many people with diabetes, an a1c test result of under 7 percent usually means that their diabetes treatment is working well and their blood glucose is under control. the a1c test (a-one-c) shows you what your blood glucose has been over the last three months. your health care provider does this test to see what your blood glucose level is most of the time. this test should be done at least twice a year for all people with diabetes and for some people more often as needed. for many people with diabetes, an a1c test result of under 7 percent usually means that their diabetes treatment is working well and their blood glucose is under control. - b is for blood pressure. the goal for most people is 140/90 but may be different for you. high blood pressure makes your heart work too hard. it can cause heart attack, stroke, and kidney disease. your blood pressure should be checked at every doctor visit. talk with your health care provider about your blood pressure goal. b is for blood pressure. the goal for most people is 140/90 but may be different for you. high blood pressure makes your heart work too hard. it can cause heart attack, stroke, and kidney disease. your blood pressure should be checked at every doctor visit. talk with your health care provider about your blood pressure goal. - c is for cholesterol (ko-les-ter-ol). the ldl goal for most people is less than 100. low density lipoprotein, or ldl-cholesterol, is the bad cholesterol that builds up in your blood vessels. it causes the vessels to narrow and harden, which can lead to a heart attack. your doctor should check your ldl at least once a year. talk with your health care provider about your cholesterol goal. c is for cholesterol (ko-les-ter-ol). the ldl goal for most people is less than 100. low density lipoprotein, or ldl-cholesterol, is the bad cholesterol that builds up in your blood vessels. it causes the vessels to narrow and harden, which can lead to a heart attack. your doctor should check your ldl at least once a year. talk with your health care provider about your cholesterol goal. ask your health care team - what your a1c, blood pressure, and cholesterol numbers are. - what your abcs should be. - what you can do to reach your target. what your a1c, blood pressure, and cholesterol numbers are. what your abcs should be. what you can do to reach your target.<end>
<question>who is at risk for diabetes? ?<answer>diabetes is a serious, life-long disease. it can lead to problems such as heart disease, stroke, vision loss, kidney disease, and nerve damage. more than 8 million people in the united states have type 2 diabetes and dont know it. many people dont find out they have diabetes until they are faced with problems such as blurry vision or heart trouble. certain factors can increase your risk for diabetes, and its important to know what they are. type 1 diabetes type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease. in an autoimmune reaction, antibodies, or immune cells, attach to the bodys own healthy tissues by mistake, signaling the body to attack them. at present, scientists do not know exactly what causes the body's immune system to attack the cells, but many believe that both genetic factors and environmental factors, such as viruses, are involved. studies are now underway to identify these factors and prevent type 1 diabetes in people at risk. learn more about the causes of type 1 diabetes. type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes -- the most common form -- is linked closely to overweight and obesity, high blood pressure, and abnormal cholesterol levels. many people with type 2 diabetes are overweight. being overweight can keep your body from using insulin properly. genes also play an important role in a person's risk for type 2 diabetes. having certain genes or combinations of genes may increase or decrease a persons risk for developing the disease. here are the risk factors for type 2 diabetes. - being over 45 years of age - being overweight or obese - having a first-degree relative -- a parent, brother, or sister -- with diabetes - being african american, american indian or alaska native, asian american or pacific islander, or hispanic american/latino. (watch the video to learn more about native americans and diabetes risk. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) being over 45 years of age being overweight or obese having a first-degree relative -- a parent, brother, or sister -- with diabetes being african american, american indian or alaska native, asian american or pacific islander, or hispanic american/latino. (watch the video to learn more about native americans and diabetes risk. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) - having gestational diabetes, or giving birth to at least one baby weighing more than 9 pounds - having blood pressure of 140/90 or higher, or having been told that you have high blood pressure. - having abnormal cholesterol levels -- an hdl cholesterol level of 35 or lower, or a triglyceride level of 250 or higher - being inactive or exercising fewer than three times a week. - having polycystic ovary syndrome, also called pcos (women only) - on previous testing, having prediabetes (an a1c level of 5.7 to 6.4 percent), impaired glucose tolerance (igt) or impaired fasting glucose (ifg) - history of cardiovascular disease (disease affecting the heart and blood vessels). having gestational diabetes, or giving birth to at least one baby weighing more than 9 pounds having blood pressure of 140/90 or higher, or having been told that you have high blood pressure. having abnormal cholesterol levels -- an hdl cholesterol level of 35 or lower, or a triglyceride level of 250 or higher being inactive or exercising fewer than three times a week. having polycystic ovary syndrome, also called pcos (women only) on previous testing, having prediabetes (an a1c level of 5.7 to 6.4 percent), impaired glucose tolerance (igt) or impaired fasting glucose (ifg) history of cardiovascular disease (disease affecting the heart and blood vessels). learn more about the causes of type 2 diabetes. prediabetes and type 2 diabetes before people develop type 2 diabetes, they usually have prediabetes -- a condition in which blood glucose levels are higher than normal, but not high enough for a diagnosis of diabetes. people with prediabetes are more likely to develop diabetes within 10 years and also are more likely to have a heart attack or stroke. prediabetes is increasingly common in the u.s. adult population. in 2012, about 86 million people in the u.s. had pre-diabetes, and 51% of those 65 or older had prediabetes. learn more about prediabetes. gestational diabetes some women develop diabetes during the late stages of pregnancy. this is called gestational diabetes. although this form of diabetes usually goes away after the baby is born, a woman who has had it has a lifelong risk for developing diabetes, mostly type 2.<end>
<question>what is (are) hemochromatosis ?<answer>hemochromatosis is a disease in which too much iron builds up in your body. your body needs iron but too much of it is toxic. if you have hemochromatosis, you absorb more iron than you need. your body has no natural way to get rid of the extra iron. it stores it in body tissues, especially the liver, heart, and pancreas. the extra iron can damage your organs. without treatment, it can cause your organs to fail. there are two types of hemochromatosis. primary hemochromatosis is an inherited disease. secondary hemochromatosis is usually the result of something else, such as anemia, thalassemia, liver disease, or blood transfusions. many symptoms of hemochromatosis are similar to those of other diseases. not everyone has symptoms. if you do, you may have joint pain, fatigue, general weakness, weight loss, and stomach pain. your doctor will diagnose hemochromatosis based on your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and the results from tests and procedures. treatments include removing blood (and iron) from your body, medicines, and changes in your diet. nih: national heart, lung, and blood institute<end>
<question>what are the treatments for hemochromatosis ?<answer>health care providers treat hemochromatosis by drawing blood. this process is called phlebotomy. phlebotomy rids the body of extra iron. this treatment is simple, inexpensive, and safe. based on the severity of the iron overload, a patient will have phlebotomy to remove a pint of blood once or twice a week for several months to a year, and occasionally longer. health care providers will test serum ferritin levels periodically to monitor iron levels. the goal is to bring serum ferritin levels to the low end of the average range and keep them there. depending on the lab, the level is 25 to 50 g/l. after phlebotomy reduces serum ferritin levels to the desired level, patients may need maintenance phlebotomy treatment every few months. some patients may need phlebotomies more often. serum ferritin tests every 6 months or once a year will help determine how often a patient should have blood drawn. many blood donation centers provide free phlebotomy treatment for people with hemochromatosis. treating hemochromatosis before organs are damaged can prevent complications such as cirrhosis, heart problems, arthritis, and diabetes. treatment cannot cure these conditions in patients who already have them at diagnosis. however, treatment will help most of these conditions improve. the treatments effectiveness depends on the degree of organ damage. for example, treating hemochromatosis can stop the progression of liver damage in its early stages and lead to a normal life expectancy. however, if a patient develops cirrhosis, his or her chance of developing liver cancer increases, even with phlebotomy treatment. arthritis usually does not improve even after phlebotomy removes extra iron.<end>
<question>what are the complications of hemochromatosis ?<answer>without treatment, iron may build up in the organs and cause complications, including - cirrhosis, or scarring of liver tissue - diabetes - irregular heart rhythms or weakening of the heart muscle - arthritis - erectile dysfunction the complication most often associated with hemochromatosis is liver damage. iron buildup in the liver causes cirrhosis, which increases the chance of developing liver cancer. for some people, complications may be the first sign of hemochromatosis. however, not everyone with hemochromatosis will develop complications.<end>
<question>what is (are) hemochromatosis ?<answer>hemochromatosis is a condition in which too much iron builds up in the body (iron overload). accumulation of iron in the organs is toxic and can result in organ failure. while many organs can be affected, it may especially affect the liver, heart, and pancreas. symptoms of hemochromatosis tend to develop gradually and often don't appear until middle age or later. the condition may not be diagnosed until iron accumulation is excessive. early symptoms may be vague, such as fatigue or weakness. other symptoms or features may include joint pain, abdominal pain, loss of sex drive, arthritis, liver disease, diabetes, heart problems, and skin discoloration. hemochromatosis may be hereditary or acquired (secondary) due to another condition such as anemia, chronic liver disease, or an infection. there is also a neonatal form. hereditary hemochromatosis is classified by type based on age of onset, genetic cause and mode of inheritance: hemochromotosis type 1 hemochromatosis type 2 hemochromatosis type 3 hemochromatosis type 4 treatment usually involves removing blood (phlebotomy), which prevents additional organ damage but does not reverse existing damage.<end>
<question>what is (are) gum (periodontal) disease ?<answer>an infection of the gums and surrounding tissues gum (periodontal) disease is an infection of the gums and surrounding tissues that hold teeth in place. the two forms of gum disease are gingivitis, a mild form that is reversible with good oral hygiene, and periodontitis, a more severe form that can damage the soft tissues and bone that support teeth. if left untreated, periodontitis can lead to tooth loss. in its early stages, gum disease is usually painless, and many people are not aware that they have it. in more advanced cases, gum disease can cause sore gums and pain when chewing. not a normal part of aging the good news is that gum disease can be prevented. it does not have to be a part of growing older. with thorough brushing and flossing and regular professional cleanings by your dentist, you can reduce your risk of developing gum disease as you age. if you have been treated for gum disease, sticking to a proper oral hygiene routine and visiting your dentist for regular cleanings can minimize the chances that it will come back. plaque buildup can form tartar gum disease is typically caused by poor brushing and flossing habits that allow dental plaque -- a sticky film of bacteria -- to build up on the teeth. plaque that is not removed can harden and form tartar that brushing doesn't clean. only a professional cleaning by a dentist or dental hygienist can remove tartar. gum disease can range from simple gum inflammation to serious disease. the two forms of gum disease are gingivitis and periodontitis. gingivitis and periodontitis in gingivitis, the gums become red, swollen and can bleed easily. gingivitis can usually be reversed with daily brushing and flossing, and regular cleaning by a dentist or dental hygienist. this form of gum disease does not include any loss of bone and tissue that hold teeth in place. when gingivitis is not treated, it can advance to periodontitis. in periodontitis, gums pull away from the teeth and form spaces (called "pockets") that become infected. the body's immune system fights the bacteria as the plaque spreads and grows below the gum line. bacterial toxins and the body's natural response to infection start to break down the bone and connective tissue that hold teeth in place. if not treated, the bones, gums, and tissue that support the teeth are destroyed. the teeth may eventually become loose and may have to be removed.<end>
<question>what causes gum (periodontal) disease ?<answer>gum disease is caused by dental plaque -- a sticky film of bacteria that builds up on teeth. regular brushing and flossing help get rid of plaque. but plaque that is not removed can harden and form tartar that brushing doesn't clean. only a professional cleaning by a dentist or dental hygienist can remove tartar.<end>
<question>how to prevent gum (periodontal) disease ?<answer>yes, you can prevent gum disease with proper dental hygiene and regular cleanings by your dentist or dental hygienist. specifically, you should - brush your teeth twice a day (with a fluoride toothpaste). - floss regularly to remove plaque from between teeth. or use a device such as a special pick recommended by a dental professional. - visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning. - not smoke. - eat a well-balanced diet. (for more information, see "eating well as you get older" at http://nihseniorhealth.gov/eatingwellasyougetolder/toc.html) brush your teeth twice a day (with a fluoride toothpaste). floss regularly to remove plaque from between teeth. or use a device such as a special pick recommended by a dental professional. visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning. not smoke. eat a well-balanced diet. (for more information, see "eating well as you get older" at http://nihseniorhealth.gov/eatingwellasyougetolder/toc.html)<end>
<question>how to prevent gum (periodontal) disease ?<answer>risk factors there are a number of risk factors that can increase your chances of developing periodontal disease. - smoking is one of the most significant risk factors associated with the development of gum disease. smoking can also lower the chances for successful treatment. - hormonal changes in women can make gums more sensitive and make it easier for gingivitis to develop. - people with diabetes are at higher risk for developing infections, including gum disease. - diseases like cancer or aids and their treatments can also negatively affect the health of gums. - there are hundreds of prescription and over-the-counter medications that can reduce the flow of saliva, which has a protective effect on the mouth. without enough saliva, the mouth is vulnerable to infections such as gum disease. and some medicines can cause abnormal overgrowth of the gum tissue; this can make it difficult to keep teeth and gums clean. - some people are more prone to severe gum disease because of their genetic makeup. smoking is one of the most significant risk factors associated with the development of gum disease. smoking can also lower the chances for successful treatment. hormonal changes in women can make gums more sensitive and make it easier for gingivitis to develop. people with diabetes are at higher risk for developing infections, including gum disease. diseases like cancer or aids and their treatments can also negatively affect the health of gums. there are hundreds of prescription and over-the-counter medications that can reduce the flow of saliva, which has a protective effect on the mouth. without enough saliva, the mouth is vulnerable to infections such as gum disease. and some medicines can cause abnormal overgrowth of the gum tissue; this can make it difficult to keep teeth and gums clean. some people are more prone to severe gum disease because of their genetic makeup. prevention here are some things you can do to prevent gum disease. - brush your teeth twice a day (with a fluoride toothpaste). - floss regularly to remove plaque from between teeth. or use a device such as a special pick recommended by a dental professional. visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning. - visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning. - don't smoke. - eat a well-balanced diet. (for more information, see "eating well as you get older" at http://nihseniorhealth.gov/eatingwellasyougetolder/toc.html brush your teeth twice a day (with a fluoride toothpaste). floss regularly to remove plaque from between teeth. or use a device such as a special pick recommended by a dental professional. visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning. visit the dentist routinely for a check-up and professional cleaning. don't smoke. eat a well-balanced diet. (for more information, see "eating well as you get older" at http://nihseniorhealth.gov/eatingwellasyougetolder/toc.html tips for easier at-home care - if your hands have become stiff because of arthritis or if you have a physical disability, you may find it difficult to use your toothbrush or dental floss. the following tips might make it easier for you to clean your teeth and gums. if your hands have become stiff because of arthritis or if you have a physical disability, you may find it difficult to use your toothbrush or dental floss. the following tips might make it easier for you to clean your teeth and gums. - make the toothbrush easier to hold. the same kind of velcro strap used to hold food utensils is helpful for some people. make the toothbrush easier to hold. the same kind of velcro strap used to hold food utensils is helpful for some people. - another way to make the toothbrush easier to hold is to attach the brush to the hand with a wide elastic or rubber band. another way to make the toothbrush easier to hold is to attach the brush to the hand with a wide elastic or rubber band. - make the toothbrush handle bigger. you can cut a small slit in the side of a tennis ball and slide it onto the handle of the toothbrush. make the toothbrush handle bigger. you can cut a small slit in the side of a tennis ball and slide it onto the handle of the toothbrush. - you can also buy a toothbrush with a large handle, or you can slide a bicycle grip onto the handle. you can also buy a toothbrush with a large handle, or you can slide a bicycle grip onto the handle. - try other toothbrush options. a power toothbrush might make brushing easier. try other toothbrush options. a power toothbrush might make brushing easier. - a floss holder can make it easier to hold the dental floss. - also, talk with your dentist about whether an oral irrigation system, special small brushes, or other instruments that clean between teeth are right for you. be sure to check with your dentist, though, before using any of these methods since they may injure the gums if used improperly. a floss holder can make it easier to hold the dental floss. also, talk with your dentist about whether an oral irrigation system, special small brushes, or other instruments that clean between teeth are right for you. be sure to check with your dentist, though, before using any of these methods since they may injure the gums if used improperly.<end>
<question>what is (are) psoriasis ?<answer>psoriasis (sow rye uh sis) is a chronic skin disease. chronic means that it lasts a long time, often a lifetime. psoriasis affects more than 5 million adults in the united states. it appears about equally in males and females. psoriasis occurs when the skin cells grow too quickly. the body does not shed these excess cells and they build up on the surface of the skin, forming thick, scaly patches. types of psoriasis psoriasis occurs in five different forms that affect both men and women. most people have only one type of psoriasis at a time. sometimes, one type of psoriasis will disappear and another will appear. here is a brief overview of the different forms of psoriasis. - is the most common form - appears as raised red patches covered in silvery white scales - usually shows up on the scalp, knees, elbows and lower back - patches may itch or be painful and can also crack and bleed. is the most common form appears as raised red patches covered in silvery white scales usually shows up on the scalp, knees, elbows and lower back patches may itch or be painful and can also crack and bleed. - is the second most common form of psoriasis - usually begins in childhood or early adulthood - appears as small red spots on the skin. is the second most common form of psoriasis usually begins in childhood or early adulthood appears as small red spots on the skin. - appears as red sores in body folds, such as the groin and under the breasts - is more common in people who are overweight - often occurs along with another form of psoriasis. appears as red sores in body folds, such as the groin and under the breasts is more common in people who are overweight often occurs along with another form of psoriasis. - features white blisters surrounded by red skin - mainly affects adults - may occur all over the body, but usually affects one area. features white blisters surrounded by red skin mainly affects adults may occur all over the body, but usually affects one area. - is the rarest and most dangerous form of psoriasis - is characterized by inflammation - usually affects most of the body. is the rarest and most dangerous form of psoriasis is characterized by inflammation usually affects most of the body.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for psoriasis ?<answer>scientists who are working to better understand and treat psoriasis are making headway in several different areas. the role of t cells scientists believe that psoriasis occurs when white blood cells called t cells, which normally help fight infections, attack the bodys skin cells by mistake. scientists are working to understand what causes these cells to go awry in people with psoriasis. their hope is that by better understanding why t cells attack the bodys healthy skin tissue, they can develop better treatments to stop or prevent that damaging process. new treatments since discovering that t cells attack skin cells in psoriasis, researchers have been studying new treatments that quiet immune system reactions in the skin. among these are treatments that block the activity of t cells or block cytokines (proteins that promote inflammation). if researchers find a way to target only the disease-causing immune reactions while leaving the rest of the immune system alone, resulting treatments could benefit psoriasis patients as well as those with other autoimmune diseases (when the immune system attacks the bodys own tissues). currently there are a number of potential psoriasis treatments in clinical trials, including injections, pills, and topical ointments. clinical trials are research studies with volunteers in which drugs are tested for the effectiveness and safety. all drugs must complete and pass this process before they can be approved by the fda. psoriasis genes because psoriasis is more common among people who have one or more family members with the disease, scientists have long suspected that genes are involved. a number of genetic loci specific locations on the genes have been associated with the development of psoriasis or the severity or progression of the disease. in 2012, scientists discovered the first gene to be directly linked to development of plaque psoriasis. researchers continue to study the genetic aspects of psoriasis, and some studies are looking at the nervous system to determine the genes responsible for the circuitry that causes itching. psoriasis-related conditions research in recent years has shown that people with psoriasis are more likely to develop other health problems, including problems with the heart and blood vessels. research is continuing to examine links between psoriasis and other health problems. scientists are working to understand how and why these diseases occur in people with psoriasis, with the hope that this understanding will lead to better treatments for both psoriasis and the related diseases. stress reduction treatment for many people with psoriasis, life stresses cause the disease to worsen or become more active. research suggests that stress is associated with the increased production of chemicals by the immune system that promote inflammation. the same chemicals may play a role in the anxiety and depression that is common in people with psoriasis. researchers are studying the use of stress reduction techniques, along with medical treatment, in the hope that reducing stress will both lower anxiety and improve the skin lesions of psoriasis. where to find more information more information on research is available from the following websites. - nih clinical research trials and you helps people learn more about clinical trials, why they matter, and how to participate. visitors to the website will find information about the basics of participating in a clinical trial, first-hand stories from actual clinical trial volunteers, explanations from researchers, and links to help you search for a trial or enroll in a research-matching program. - clinicaltrials.gov offers up-to-date information for locating federally and privately supported clinical trials for a wide range of diseases and conditions. - nih reporter is an electronic tool that allows users to search a repository of both intramural and extramural nih-funded research projects from the past 25 years and access publications (since 1985) and patents resulting from nih funding. - pubmed is a free service of the u.s. national library of medicine that lets you search millions of journal citations and abstracts in the fields of medicine, nursing, dentistry, veterinary medicine, the health care system, and preclinical sciences. nih clinical research trials and you helps people learn more about clinical trials, why they matter, and how to participate. visitors to the website will find information about the basics of participating in a clinical trial, first-hand stories from actual clinical trial volunteers, explanations from researchers, and links to help you search for a trial or enroll in a research-matching program. clinicaltrials.gov offers up-to-date information for locating federally and privately supported clinical trials for a wide range of diseases and conditions. nih reporter is an electronic tool that allows users to search a repository of both intramural and extramural nih-funded research projects from the past 25 years and access publications (since 1985) and patents resulting from nih funding. pubmed is a free service of the u.s. national library of medicine that lets you search millions of journal citations and abstracts in the fields of medicine, nursing, dentistry, veterinary medicine, the health care system, and preclinical sciences.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for psoriasis ?<answer>there are many types of treatments. many are medicines and other treatments your doctor will have to prescribe. but there are other types of treatments you can buy without a prescription or try on your own. some treatments for psoriasis are applied to the directly to the skin. some use light to treat skin lesions. others are taken by mouth or injected.<end>
<question>what causes psoriasis ?<answer>although the cause of psoriasis is not completely understood, scientists believe it is related to a problem with a type of blood cells called t cells. these cells normally travel through the bloodstream to help fight an infection, but in people with psoriasis, they attack the bodys skin cells by mistake. genes play a role no one knows what causes t cells to go wrong, but certain genes have been linked to psoriasis. people who have these genes are more likely to develop psoriasis than people without the genes. however, genes alone do not cause psoriasis. scientists believe psoriasis occurs when something in the environment triggers the disease in someone who has one or more of these genes. psoriasis triggers these so-called triggers may be different for different people. different triggers may start the disease or make it worse in different people. factors that may trigger psoriasis or make it worse include - physical and emotional stress - injury to the skin such as cuts or burns - infections, particularly strep throat - cold weather - smoking or heavy alcohol use - certain medications such as - lithium, a psychiatric drug - antimalarials such as hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine - inderal, a high blood pressure medicine - quinidine, a heart medication - indomethacin, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug often used to treat arthritis. physical and emotional stress injury to the skin such as cuts or burns infections, particularly strep throat cold weather smoking or heavy alcohol use certain medications such as - lithium, a psychiatric drug - antimalarials such as hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine - inderal, a high blood pressure medicine - quinidine, a heart medication - indomethacin, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug often used to treat arthritis. lithium, a psychiatric drug antimalarials such as hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine inderal, a high blood pressure medicine quinidine, a heart medication indomethacin, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug often used to treat arthritis.<end>
<question>what is (are) langerhans cell histiocytosis ?<answer>key points - langerhans cell histiocytosis is a type of cancer that can damage tissue or cause lesions to form in one or more places in the body. - family history or having a parent who was exposed to certain chemicals may increase the risk of lch. - the signs and symptoms of lch depend on where it is in the body. - skin and nails - mouth - bone - lymph nodes and thymus - endocrine system - central nervous system (cns) - liver and spleen - lung - bone marrow - tests that examine the organs and body systems where lch may occur are used to detect (find) and diagnose lch. - certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. langerhans cell histiocytosis is a type of cancer that can damage tissue or cause lesions to form in one or more places in the body. langerhans cell histiocytosis (lch) is a rare cancer that begins in lch cells (a type of dendritic cell which fights infection). sometimes there are mutations (changes) in lch cells as they form. these include mutations of the braf gene. these changes may make the lch cells grow and multiply quickly. this causes lch cells to build up in certain parts of the body, where they can damage tissue or form lesions. lch is not a disease of the langerhans cells that normally occur in the skin. lch may occur at any age, but is most common in young children. treatment of lch in children is different from treatment of lch in adults. the treatments for lch in children and adults are described in separate sections of this summary. check the list of nci-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with childhood langerhans cell histiocytosis. for more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. general information about clinical trials is available from the nci website.<end>
<question>what are the stages of langerhans cell histiocytosis ?<answer>key points - there is no staging system for langerhans cell histiocytosis (lch). - treatment of lch is based on where lch cells are found in the body and how many body systems are affected. there is no staging system for langerhans cell histiocytosis (lch). the extent or spread of cancer is usually described as stages. there is no staging system for lch. treatment of lch is based on where lch cells are found in the body and how many body systems are affected. lch is described as single-system disease or multisystem disease, depending on how many body systems are affected: - single-system lch: lch is found in one part of an organ or body system (unifocal) or in more than one part of that organ or body system (multifocal). bone is the most common single place for lch to be found. - multisystem lch: lch occurs in two or more organs or body systems or may be spread throughout the body. multisystem lch is less common than single-system lch. lch may affect low-risk organs or high-risk organs: - low-risk organs include the skin, bone, lungs, lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract, pituitary gland, and central nervous system (cns). - high-risk organs include the liver, spleen, and bone marrow.<end>
<question>is langerhans cell histiocytosis inherited ?<answer>is langerhans cell histiocytosis inherited? although langerhans cell histiocytosis is generally considered a sporadic, non-hereditary condition, it has reportedly affected more than one individual in a family in a very limited number of cases (particularly identical twins).<end>
<question>who is at risk for langerhans cell histiocytosis? ?<answer>anything that increases your risk of getting a disease is called a risk factor. having a risk factor does not mean that you will get cancer; not having risk factors doesn't mean that you will not get cancer. talk with your doctor if you think you may be at risk. risk factors for lch include the following: - having a parent who was exposed to certain chemicals such as benzene. - having a parent who was exposed to metal, granite, or wood dust in the workplace. - a family history of cancer, including lch. - having infections as a newborn. - having a personal history or family history of thyroid disease. - smoking, especially in young adults. - being hispanic.<end>
<question>what is (are) diabetic retinopathy ?<answer>can cause vision loss, blindness diabetic retinopathy is a complication of diabetes and a leading cause of blindness. it occurs when diabetes damages the tiny blood vessels inside the retina in the back of the eye. a healthy retina is necessary for good vision. if you have diabetic retinopathy, at first you may notice no changes to your vision. but over time, diabetic retinopathy can get worse and cause vision loss. diabetic retinopathy usually affects both eyes. four stages the four stages of diabetic retinopathy are - mild nonproliferative retinopathy - moderate nonproliferative retinopathy - severe nonproliferative retinopathy - proliferative retinopathy. mild nonproliferative retinopathy moderate nonproliferative retinopathy severe nonproliferative retinopathy proliferative retinopathy. the first stage is mild nonproliferative retinopathy. at this earliest stage, there are small areas of balloon-like swelling in the retina's tiny blood vessels. the second stage is moderate nonproliferative retinopathy. as the disease progresses, some blood vessels that nourish the retina are blocked. the third stage is severe nonproliferative retinopathy. many more blood vessels are blocked, depriving several areas of the retina of their blood supply. these areas send signals to the body to grow new blood vessels for nourishment. the fourth stage is proliferative retinopathy. at this advanced stage, the signals sent by the retina for nourishment cause the growth of new blood vessels. these new blood vessels are abnormal and fragile. the new blood vessels grow along the retina and along the surface of the clear, vitreous gel that fills the inside of the eye. by themselves, these blood vessels do not cause symptoms or vision loss. however, they have thin, fragile walls. if they leak blood, severe vision loss and even blindness can result. other diabetic eye diseases in addition to diabetic retinopathy, other diabetic eye diseases that people with diabetes may face are cataract and glaucoma. see this graphic for a quick overview of diabetic eye disease, including how many people it affects, whos at risk, what to do if you have it, and how to learn more.<end>
<question>what is (are) diabetic retinopathy ?<answer>the four stages of diabetic retinopathy are - mild nonproliferative retinopathy - moderate nonproliferative retinopathy - severe nonproliferative retinopathy - proliferative retinopathy mild nonproliferative retinopathy moderate nonproliferative retinopathy severe nonproliferative retinopathy proliferative retinopathy nonproliferative retinopathy. at this earliest stage, microaneurysms occur. they are small areas of balloon-like swelling in the retina's tiny blood vessels. moderate nonproliferative retinopathy. as the disease progresses, some blood vessels that nourish the retina are blocked. severe nonproliferative retinopathy. many more blood vessels are blocked, depriving several areas of the retina of their blood supply. these areas of the retina send signals to the body to grow new blood vessels for nourishment. proliferative retinopathy. at this advanced stage, the signals sent by the retina for nourishment trigger the growth of new blood vessels. these new blood vessels are abnormal and fragile. they grow along the retina and along the surface of the clear, vitreous gel that fills the inside of the eye.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for diabetic retinopathy ?<answer>research found that that prompt treatment of macular edema with anti-vegf drugs, with or without laser treatment, resulted in better vision than laser treatment alone or steroid injections. when injected into the eye, these drugs reduce fluid leakage and interfere with the growth of new blood vessels in the retina. in some cases, focal laser treatment is used along with the eye injections. your doctor places up to several hundred small laser burns in the areas of the retina around the macula that are leaking. these burns slow the leakage of fluid and reduce the amount of fluid in the retina. the surgery is usually completed in one session. further treatment may be needed.<end>
<question>what causes diabetic retinopathy ?<answer>who is at risk? all people with diabetes -- both type 1 and type 2 -- are at risk for diabetic retinopathy. people with diabetes are also at increased risk for cataract and glaucoma. that's why everyone with diabetes should get a comprehensive dilated eye exam at least once a year. between 40 to 45 percent of americans diagnosed with diabetes have some stage of diabetic retinopathy. if you have diabetic retinopathy, your doctor can recommend treatment to help prevent its progression. how vision loss occurs blood vessels damaged from diabetic retinopathy can cause vision loss in two ways. fragile, abnormal blood vessels can develop and leak blood into the center of the eye, blurring vision. this is proliferative retinopathy and is the fourth and most advanced stage of the disease. fluid can leak into the center of the macula, the part of the eye where sharp, straight-ahead vision occurs. the fluid makes the macula swell, blurring vision. this condition is called macular edema. macular edema can occur at any stage of diabetic retinopathy, although it is more likely to occur as the disease progresses. about half of the people with proliferative retinopathy also have macular edema. macular edema can occur at any stage of diabetic retinopathy, although it is more likely to occur as the disease progresses. about half of the people with proliferative retinopathy also have macular edema. have dilated eye exams the national eye institute (nei) urges everyone with diabetes to have a comprehensive dilated eye exam at least once a year. if you have diabetic retinopathy, you may need an eye exam more often. people with proliferative retinopathy can reduce their risk of blindness by 95 percent with timely treatment and appropriate follow-up care. watch an animation to see what a comprehensive dilated eye exam includes.<end>
<question>what is (are) neuroblastoma ?<answer>key points - neuroblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in nerve tissue. - most cases of neuroblastoma are diagnosed before 1 year of age. - the risk factors for neuroblastoma are not known. neuroblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in nerve tissue. neuroblastoma often begins in the nerve tissue of the adrenal glands. there are two adrenal glands, one on top of each kidney, in the back of the upper abdomen. the adrenal glands make important hormones that help control heart rate, blood pressure, blood sugar, and the way the body reacts to stress. neuroblastoma may also begin in the abdomen, chest, spinal cord, or in nerve tissue near the spine in the neck. neuroblastoma most often begins during early childhood, usually in children younger than 5 years of age. see the pdq summary on neuroblastoma treatment for more information about neuroblastoma. most cases of neuroblastoma are diagnosed before 1 year of age. neuroblastoma is the most common type of cancer in infants. the number of new cases of neuroblastoma is greatest among children under 1 year of age. as children get older, the number of new cases decreases. neuroblastoma is slightly more common in males than females. neuroblastoma sometimes forms before birth but is usually found later, when the tumor begins to grow and cause symptoms. in rare cases, neuroblastoma may be found before birth, by fetal ultrasound.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of neuroblastoma ?<answer>signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma include bone pain and a lump in the abdomen, neck, or chest.the most common signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma are caused by the tumor pressing on nearby tissues as it grows or by cancer spreading to the bone. these and other signs and symptoms may be caused by neuroblastoma or by other conditions. check with your childs doctor if your child has any of the following: - lump in the abdomen, neck, or chest. - bulging eyes. - dark circles around the eyes ("black eyes"). - bone pain. - swollen stomach and trouble breathing (in infants). - painless, bluish lumps under the skin (in infants). - weakness or paralysis (loss of ability to move a body part). less common signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma include the following: - fever. - shortness of breath. - feeling tired. - easy bruising or bleeding. - petechiae (flat, pinpoint spots under the skin caused by bleeding). - high blood pressure. - severe watery diarrhea. - horner syndrome (droopy eyelid, smaller pupil, and less sweating on one side of the face). - jerky muscle movements. - uncontrolled eye movements.<end>
<question>what is (are) neuroblastoma ?<answer>neuroblastoma is a cancer that forms in your nerve tissue. it usually begins in the adrenal glands, which sit atop your kidneys. it may also begin in your neck, chest or spinal cord. the cancer often begins in early childhood. sometimes it begins before a child is born. by the time doctors find the cancer, it has usually spread to other parts of the body. the most common symptoms are - a lump in the abdomen, neck or chest - bulging eyes - dark circles around the eyes - bone pain - swollen stomach and trouble breathing in babies - painless, bluish lumps under the skin in babies - inability to move a body part treatments include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, biologic therapy, or a combination. biologic therapy boosts your body's own ability to fight cancer. sometimes before giving treatment, doctors wait to see whether symptoms get worse. this is called watchful waiting. nih: national cancer institute<end>
<question>who is at risk for neuroblastoma? ?<answer>the risk factors for neuroblastoma are not known.<end>
<question>what is (are) narcolepsy ?<answer>narcolepsy is a chronic brain disorder that involves poor control of sleep-wake cycles. people with narcolepsy have episodes of extreme daytime sleepiness and sudden, irresistible bouts of sleep (called "sleep attacks") that can occur at any time, and may last from seconds or minutes. other signs and symptoms may include cataplexy (a sudden loss of muscle tone that makes a person go limp or unable to move); vivid dream-like images or hallucinations; and/or total paralysis just before falling asleep or after waking-up. narcolepsy may have several causes, the most common being low levels of the neurotransmitter hypocretin (for various possible reasons). the disorder is usually sporadic but some cases are familial. there is no cure, but some symptoms can be managed with medicines and lifestyle changes.<end>
<question>what causes narcolepsy ?<answer>most people who have narcolepsy have low levels of hypocretin. this is a chemical in the brain that helps promote wakefulness. what causes low hypocretin levels isn't well understood. researchers think that certain factors may work together to cause a lack of hypocretin. these factors may include: heredity. some people may inherit a gene that affects hypocretin. up to 10 percent of people who have narcolepsy report having a relative who has the same symptoms. infections. brain injuries caused by conditions such as brain tumors, strokes, or trauma (for example, car accidents or military-related wounds). autoimmune disorders. with these disorders, the body's immune system mistakenly attacks the body's cells and tissues. an example of an autoimmune disorder is rheumatoid arthritis. low levels of histamine, a substance in the blood that promotes wakefulness. some research suggests that environmental toxins may play a role in triggering narcolepsy. toxins may include heavy metals, pesticides and weed killers, and secondhand smoke. heredity alone doesn't cause narcolepsy. you also must have at least one other factor, such as one of those listed above, to develop narcolepsy.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for narcolepsy ?<answer>there is no cure for narcolepsy. in 1999, after successful clinical trial results, the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) approved a drug called modafinil for the treatment of eds. two classes of antidepressant drugs have proved effective in controlling cataplexy in many patients: tricyclics (including imipramine, desipramine, clomipramine, and protriptyline) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (including fluoxetine and sertraline). drug therapy should be supplemented by behavioral strategies. for example, many people with narcolepsy take short, regularly scheduled naps at times when they tend to feel sleepiest. improving the quality of nighttime sleep can combat eds and help relieve persistent feelings of fatigue. among the most important common-sense measures people with narcolepsy can take to enhance sleep quality are actions such as maintaining a regular sleep schedule, and avoiding alcohol and caffeine-containing beverages before bedtime. the drug xyrem (sodium oxybate or gamma hydroxybutyrate, also known as ghb) was approved in july 2002 for treating cataplexy and in november 2005 for eds in people who have narcolepsy. due to safety concerns associated with the use of this drug, the distribution of xyrem is tightly restricted.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of narcolepsy ?<answer>what are the signs and symptoms of narcolepsy? the human phenotype ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for narcolepsy. if the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. you can use the medlineplus medical dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. signs and symptoms approximate number of patients (when available) hallucinations 90% memory impairment 90% muscle weakness 90% reduced consciousness/confusion 90% sleep disturbance 90% abnormality of eye movement 50% neurological speech impairment 7.5% obesity 7.5% sudden cardiac death 7.5% abnormal rapid eye movement (rem) sleep - autosomal dominant inheritance - cataplexy - excessive daytime sleepiness - heterogeneous - hypnagogic hallucinations - hypnopompic hallucinations - narcolepsy - paroxysmal drowsiness - the human phenotype ontology (hpo) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. much of this information comes from orphanet, a european rare disease database. the frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. the frequency may also be listed as a fraction. the first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. for example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. sometimes, no information on frequency is available. in these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.<end>
<question>what is (are) polycystic kidney disease ?<answer>polycystic kidney disease refers to a group of inherited kidney disorders characterized by the presence of multiple cysts in both kidneys. normal kidney tissue is replaced by fluid-filled sacs that interfere with the their ability to filter waste products from the blood. the growth of cysts causes the kidneys to become enlarged and can lead to kidney failure. cysts may also develop in other organs, particularly the liver. however, signs and symptom severity can vary greatly from person to person. treatment is tailored to the individual based upon their signs and symptoms. the two major forms of polycystic kidney disease are distinguished by the usual age of onset and their pattern of inheritance: (1) autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (adpkd) is the most common form that usually causes symptoms between the ages of 30 and 40; but they can begin earlier, even in childhood. adpkd can be further divided into type 1 and type 2, depending on the underlying genetic cause. (2) autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (arpkd) is a rare form that usually causes symptoms in infancy and early childhood and is often lethal early in life. some people with arpkd do not develop symptoms until later in childhood or even adulthood.<end>
<question>is polycystic kidney disease inherited ?<answer>most cases of polycystic kidney disease have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. people with this condition are born with one mutated copy of the pkd1 or pkd2 gene in each cell. in about 90 percent of these cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from one affected parent. the other 10 percent of cases result from a new mutation in one of the genes and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. although one altered copy of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, an additional mutation in the second copy of the pkd1 or pkd2 gene may make cysts grow faster and increase the severity of the disease. the rate at which cysts enlarge and cause a loss of kidney function varies widely, and may be influenced by mutations in other genes that have not been identified. polycystic kidney disease also can be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. people with this form of the condition have two altered copies of the pkhd1 gene in each cell. the parents of a child with an autosomal recessive disorder are not affected but are carriers of one copy of the altered gene.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of polycystic kidney disease ?<answer>in many cases, pkd does not cause signs or symptoms until cysts are half an inch or larger. when present, the most common symptoms are pain in the back and sidesbetween the ribs and hipsand headaches. the pain can be temporary or persistent, mild or severe. hematuriablood in the urinemay also be a sign of autosomal dominant pkd.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of polycystic kidney disease ?<answer>what are the signs and symptoms of polycystic kidney disease? signs and symptoms vary greatly from person to person. but affected individuals typically develop multiple cysts in both kidneys, which impair their ability to filter waste products from the blood. later in the disease, the cysts cause the kidneys to become enlarged and can lead to kidney failure. cysts may also develop in other organs, particularly the liver. frequent complications of polycystic kidney disease include dangerously high blood pressure (hypertension), severe pain in the back or sides, blood in the urine (hematuria), recurrent urinary tract infections, kidney stones, and heart valve abnormalities. people with this condition also have an increased risk an aortic aneurysm in the brain (an abnormal bulging of the large blood vessel at the base of the brain). aneurysms can be life-threatening if they tear or rupture. the human phenotype ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for polycystic kidney disease. if the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. you can use the medlineplus medical dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. signs and symptoms approximate number of patients (when available) polycystic kidney dysplasia 90% anemia 50% cystic liver disease 50% hematuria 50% hypertension 50% nephrolithiasis 50% proteinuria 50% renal insufficiency 50% abnormality of prenatal development or birth 7.5% abnormality of the pancreas 7.5% abnormality of the respiratory system 7.5% aneurysm 7.5% dilatation of the ascending aorta 7.5% hydrocephalus 7.5% recurrent fractures 7.5% reduced bone mineral density 7.5% sarcoma 7.5% autosomal dominant inheritance - cerebral aneurysm - colonic diverticula - hepatic cysts - heterogeneous - increased prevalence of valvular disease - the human phenotype ontology (hpo) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. much of this information comes from orphanet, a european rare disease database. the frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. the frequency may also be listed as a fraction. the first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. for example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. sometimes, no information on frequency is available. in these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.<end>
<question>what is (are) rheumatoid arthritis ?<answer>an inflammatory, autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease that causes pain, swelling, stiffness, and loss of function in the joints. it can cause mild to severe symptoms. rheumatoid arthritis not only affects the joints, but may also attack tissue in the skin, lungs, eyes, and blood vessels. people with rheumatoid arthritis may feel sick, tired, and sometimes feverish. rheumatoid arthritis is classified as an autoimmune disease. an autoimmune disease occurs when the immune system turns against parts of the body it is designed to protect. rheumatoid arthritis generally occurs in a symmetrical pattern. this means that if one knee or hand is involved, the other one is, too. it can occur at any age, but usually begins during a person's most productive years. affects more women than men rheumatoid arthritis occurs much more frequently in women than in men. about two to three times as many women as men have the disease. learn more about how rheumatoid arthritis occurs. effects vary rheumatoid arthritis affects people differently. some people have mild or moderate forms of the disease, with periods of worsening symptoms, called flares, and periods in which they feel better, called remissions. others have a severe form of the disease that is active most of the time, lasts for many years or a lifetime, and leads to serious joint damage and disability. although rheumatoid arthritis is primarily a disease of the joints, its effects are not just physical. many people with rheumatoid arthritis also experience issues related to - depression, anxiety - feelings of helplessness - low self-esteem. depression, anxiety feelings of helplessness low self-esteem. rheumatoid arthritis can affect virtually every area of a persons life from work life to family life. it can also interfere with the joys and responsibilities of family life and may affect the decision to have children. treatment can help fortunately, current treatment strategies allow most people with the disease to lead active and productive lives. these strategies include pain-relieving drugs and medications that slow joint damage, a balance between rest and exercise, and patient education and support programs. in recent years, research has led to a new understanding of rheumatoid arthritis and has increased the likelihood that, in time, researchers will find even better ways to treat the disease.<end>
<question>what is (are) rheumatoid arthritis ?<answer>rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease that causes pain, swelling, stiffness, and loss of function in the joints. it can cause mild to severe symptoms. people with rheumatoid arthritis may feel sick, tired, and sometimes feverish. sometimes rheumatoid arthritis attacks tissue in the skin, lungs, eyes, and blood vessels. the disease generally occurs in a symmetrical pattern. if one knee or hand is involved, usually the other one is, too. it can occur at any age, but often begins between ages 40 and 60. about two to three times as many women as men have rheumatoid arthritis. learn more about how rheumatoid arthritis occurs.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for rheumatoid arthritis ?<answer>most people who have rheumatoid arthritis take medications. some drugs only provide relief for pain; others reduce inflammation. still others, called disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs or dmards, can often slow the course of the disease. - dmards include methotrexate, leflunomide, sulfasalazine, and cyclosporine. - steroids, which are also called corticosteroids, are another type of drug used to reduce inflammation for people with rheumatoid arthritis. cortisone, hydrocortisone, and prednisone are some commonly used steroids. - dmards called biological response modifiers also can help reduce joint damage. these drugs include etanercept, infliximab, and anakinra. - another dmard, tofacitinib, from a new class of drugs called jak kinase (jak) inhibitors is also available. dmards include methotrexate, leflunomide, sulfasalazine, and cyclosporine. steroids, which are also called corticosteroids, are another type of drug used to reduce inflammation for people with rheumatoid arthritis. cortisone, hydrocortisone, and prednisone are some commonly used steroids. dmards called biological response modifiers also can help reduce joint damage. these drugs include etanercept, infliximab, and anakinra. another dmard, tofacitinib, from a new class of drugs called jak kinase (jak) inhibitors is also available. early treatment with powerful drugs and drug combinations -- including biological response modifiers and dmards -- instead of single drugs may help prevent the disease from progressing and greatly reduce joint damage.<end>
<question>what causes rheumatoid arthritis ?<answer>actual cause is unknown scientists believe that rheumatoid arthritis may result from the interaction of many factors such as genetics, hormones, and the environment. although rheumatoid arthritis sometimes runs in families, the actual cause of rheumatoid arthritis is still unknown. research suggests that a person's genetic makeup is an important part of the picture, but not the whole story. some evidence shows that infectious agents, such as viruses and bacteria, may trigger rheumatoid arthritis in people with an inherited tendency to develop the disease. however, a specific agent or agents are not yet known. not contagious it is important to note that rheumatoid arthritis is not contagious. a person cannot catch it from someone else. learn more about the causes of rheumatoid arthritis.<end>
<question>what is (are) alagille syndrome ?<answer>alagille syndrome is an inherited disorder in which a person has fewer than the normal number of small bile ducts inside the liver. it is a complex disorder that can affect other parts of the body including the heart, kidneys, blood vessels, eyes, face, and skeleton. symptoms, including jaundice, pale, loose stools, and poor growth, typically develop in the first 2 years of life. symptoms and symptom severity varies, even among people in the same family. alagille syndrome is caused by mutations in the jag1 and notch2 genes. it is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. treatment is symptomatic and supportive. in severe cases, liver transplant may be necessary.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of alagille syndrome ?<answer>what are the signs and symptoms of alagille syndrome? alagille syndrome is a complex multisystem disorder involving the liver, heart, eyes, face, and skeleton. symptoms typically present in infancy or early childhood. the severity of the disorder varies among affected individuals, even within the same family. symptoms range from so mild as to go unnoticed to severe enough to require heart and/or liver transplants. one of the major features of alagille syndrome is liver damage caused by abnormalities in the bile ducts. these ducts carry bile (which helps to digest fats) from the liver to the gallbladder and small intestine. in alagille syndrome, the bile ducts may be narrow, malformed, and reduced in number. this results in a build-up of bile causing scarring that prevents the liver from working properly. this may lead to jaundice, itchy skin, and deposits of cholesterol in the skin (xanthomas). alagille syndrome is also associated with several heart problems, including impaired blood flow from the heart into the lungs (pulmonic stenosis). other heart-related problems include a hole between the two lower chambers of the heart (ventricular septal defect) and a combination of heart defects called tetralogy of fallot. people with alagille syndrome may also have distinctive facial features (including a broad, prominent forehead; deep-set eyes; and a small, pointed chin), problems with the blood vessels within the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) and the kidneys, and an unusual butterfly shape of the bones of the spinal column (vertebrae). detailed information about the symptoms associated with allagille syndrome can be accessed through the national digestive diseases information clearinghouse (nddic) and genereviews. the human phenotype ontology provides the following list of signs and symptoms for alagille syndrome. if the information is available, the table below includes how often the symptom is seen in people with this condition. you can use the medlineplus medical dictionary to look up the definitions for these medical terms. signs and symptoms approximate number of patients (when available) biliary tract abnormality 90% corneal dystrophy 90% hepatomegaly 90% ventricular septal defect 90% abnormal form of the vertebral bodies 50% abnormal nasal morphology 50% abnormality of the pinna 50% coarse facial features 50% frontal bossing 50% intrauterine growth retardation 50% pointed chin 50% round face 50% spina bifida occulta 50% telangiectasia of the skin 50% vertebral segmentation defect 50% abnormality of chromosome segregation 7.5% abnormality of the pulmonary artery 7.5% abnormality of the pupil 7.5% abnormality of the ribs 7.5% abnormality of the ulna 7.5% abnormality of the ureter 7.5% atria septal defect 7.5% clinodactyly of the 5th finger 7.5% cognitive impairment 7.5% cryptorchidism 7.5% decreased corneal thickness 7.5% deeply set eye 7.5% delayed skeletal maturation 7.5% hypertelorism 7.5% hypertension 7.5% intellectual disability, mild 7.5% malar flattening 7.5% nephrotic syndrome 7.5% renal hypoplasia/aplasia 7.5% short distal phalanx of finger 7.5% short philtrum 7.5% strabismus 7.5% areflexia - autosomal dominant inheritance - axenfeld anomaly - band keratopathy - broad forehead - butterfly vertebral arch - cataract - chorioretinal atrophy - cirrhosis - coarctation of aorta - depressed nasal bridge - elevated hepatic transaminases - exocrine pancreatic insufficiency - failure to thrive - hemivertebrae - hepatocellular carcinoma - hypercholesterolemia - hypertriglyceridemia - hypoplasia of the ulna - incomplete penetrance - infantile onset - long nose - macrotia - microcornea - multiple small medullary renal cysts - myopia - papillary thyroid carcinoma - peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis - pigmentary retinal deposits - posterior embryotoxon - prolonged neonatal jaundice - reduced number of intrahepatic bile ducts - renal dysplasia - renal hypoplasia - renal tubular acidosis - specific learning disability - stroke - tetralogy of fallot - triangular face - upslanted palpebral fissure - vesicoureteral reflux - the human phenotype ontology (hpo) has collected information on how often a sign or symptom occurs in a condition. much of this information comes from orphanet, a european rare disease database. the frequency of a sign or symptom is usually listed as a rough estimate of the percentage of patients who have that feature. the frequency may also be listed as a fraction. the first number of the fraction is how many people had the symptom, and the second number is the total number of people who were examined in one study. for example, a frequency of 25/25 means that in a study of 25 people all patients were found to have that symptom. because these frequencies are based on a specific study, the fractions may be different if another group of patients are examined. sometimes, no information on frequency is available. in these cases, the sign or symptom may be rare or common.<end>
<question>what is (are) alagille syndrome ?<answer>the digestive system is made up of the gastrointestinal (gi) tractalso called the digestive tractand the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder. the gi tract is a series of hollow organs joined in a long, twisting tube from the mouth to the anus. the hollow organs that make up the gi tract are the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestinewhich includes the colon and rectumand anus. food enters the mouth and passes to the anus through the hollow organs of the digestive system. the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder are the solid organs of the digestive system. the digestive system helps the body digest food.<end>
<question>is alagille syndrome inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered or deleted gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. in approximately 30 to 50 percent of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation or deletion from one affected parent. other cases result from new mutations in the gene or new deletions of genetic material on chromosome 20 that occur as random events during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early fetal development. these cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.<end>
<question>what is (are) alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency ?<answer>alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (aat deficiency) is an inherited condition that raises your risk for lung and liver disease. alpha-1 antitrypsin (aat) is a protein that protects the lungs. the liver makes it. if the aat proteins aren't the right shape, they get stuck in the liver cells and can't reach the lungs. symptoms of aat deficiency include - shortness of breath and wheezing - repeated lung infections - tiredness - rapid heartbeat upon standing - vision problems - weight loss some people have no symptoms and do not develop complications. blood tests and genetic tests can tell if you have it. if your lungs are affected, you may also have lung tests. treatments include medicines, pulmonary rehab, and extra oxygen, if needed. severe cases may need a lung transplant. not smoking can prevent or delay lung symptoms. nih: national heart, lung, and blood institute<end>
<question>what is (are) alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency ?<answer>alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (aatd) is a disorder that causes a deficiency or absence of the alpha-1 antitrypsin (aat) protein in the blood. aat is made in the liver and sent through the bloodstream to the lungs, to protect the lungs from damage. having low levels of att (or no att) can allow the lungs to become damaged, making breathing hard. age of onset and severity of aatd can vary based on how much att an affected person is missing. in adults, symptoms may include shortness of breath; reduced ability to exercise; wheezing; respiratory infections; fatigue; vision problems; and weight loss. some people have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) or asthma. liver disease (cirrhosis) may occur in affected children or adults. rarely, aatd can cause a skin condition called panniculitis. aatd is caused by mutations in the serpina1 gene and is inherited in a codominant manner. treatment is based on each person's symptoms and may include bronchodilators; antibiotics for upper respiratory tract infections; intravenous therapy of aat; and/or lung transplantation in severe cases.<end>
<question>who is at risk for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency? ?<answer>alpha-1 antitrypsin (aat) deficiency occurs in all ethnic groups. however, the condition occurs most often in white people of european descent. aat deficiency is an inherited condition. "inherited" means the condition is passed from parents to children through genes. if you have bloodline relatives with known aat deficiency, you're at increased risk for the condition. even so, it doesn't mean that you'll develop one of the diseases related to the condition. some risk factors make it more likely that you'll develop lung disease if you have aat deficiency. smoking is the leading risk factor for serious lung disease if you have aat deficiency. your risk for lung disease also may go up if you're exposed to dust, fumes, or other toxic substances.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency ?<answer>how might alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency be treated? treatment of alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (aatd) depends on the symptoms and severity in each person. copd and other related lung diseases are typically treated with standard therapy. bronchodilators and inhaled steroids can help open the airways and make breathing easier. intravenous augmentation therapy (regular infusion of purified, human aat to increase aat concentrations) has been recommended for people with established fixed airflow obstruction (determined by a specific lung function test). this therapy raises the level of the aat protein in the blood and lungs. lung transplantation may be an appropriate option for people with end-stage lung disease. liver transplantation is the definitive treatment for advanced liver disease. when present, panniculitis may resolve on its own or after dapsone or doxycycline therapy. when this therapy does not help, it has responded to intravenous augmentation therapy in higher than usual doses. all people with severe aatd should have pulmonary function tests every 6 to 12 months. those with att serum concentrations 10% to 20% of normal should have periodic evaluation of liver function to detect liver disease. people with established liver disease should have periodic ultrasounds of the liver to monitor for fibrotic changes and liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma). yearly vaccinations against influenza and pneumococcus are recommended to lessen the progression of lung disease. vaccination against hepatitis a and b is recommended to lessen the risk of liver disease. people with aatd should avoid smoking and occupations with exposure to environmental pollutants. parents, older and younger siblings, and children of a person with severe aatd should be evaluated to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from treatment and preventive measures.<end>
<question>what is (are) cyclic vomiting syndrome ?<answer>cyclic vomiting syndrome is a disorder that causes recurrent episodes of nausea, vomiting, and tiredness (lethargy). this condition is diagnosed most often in young children, but it can affect people of any age. the episodes of nausea, vomiting, and lethargy last anywhere from an hour to 10 days. an affected person may vomit several times per hour, potentially leading to a dangerous loss of fluids (dehydration). additional symptoms can include unusually pale skin (pallor), abdominal pain, diarrhea, headache, fever, and an increased sensitivity to light (photophobia) or to sound (phonophobia). in most affected people, the signs and symptoms of each attack are quite similar. these attacks can be debilitating, making it difficult for an affected person to go to work or school. episodes of nausea, vomiting, and lethargy can occur regularly or apparently at random, or can be triggered by a variety of factors. the most common triggers are emotional excitement and infections. other triggers can include periods without eating (fasting), temperature extremes, lack of sleep, overexertion, allergies, ingesting certain foods or alcohol, and menstruation. if the condition is not treated, episodes usually occur four to 12 times per year. between attacks, vomiting is absent, and nausea is either absent or much reduced. however, many affected people experience other symptoms during and between episodes, including pain, lethargy, digestive disorders such as gastroesophageal reflux and irritable bowel syndrome, and fainting spells (syncope). people with cyclic vomiting syndrome are also more likely than people without the disorder to experience depression, anxiety, and panic disorder. it is unclear whether these health conditions are directly related to nausea and vomiting. cyclic vomiting syndrome is often considered to be a variant of migraines, which are severe headaches often associated with pain, nausea, vomiting, and extreme sensitivity to light and sound. cyclic vomiting syndrome is likely the same as or closely related to a condition called abdominal migraine, which is characterized by attacks of stomach pain and cramping. attacks of nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain in childhood may be replaced by migraine headaches as an affected person gets older. many people with cyclic vomiting syndrome or abdominal migraine have a family history of migraines. most people with cyclic vomiting syndrome have normal intelligence, although some affected people have developmental delay or intellectual disability. autism spectrum disorders, which affect communication and social interaction, have also been associated with cyclic vomiting syndrome. additionally, muscle weakness (myopathy) and seizures are possible. people with any of these additional features are said to have cyclic vomiting syndrome plus.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by cyclic vomiting syndrome ?<answer>the exact prevalence of cyclic vomiting syndrome is unknown; estimates range from 4 to 2,000 per 100,000 children. the condition is diagnosed less frequently in adults, although recent studies suggest that the condition may begin in adulthood as commonly as it begins in childhood.<end>
<question>what is (are) cyclic vomiting syndrome ?<answer>cyclic vomiting syndrome, sometimes referred to as cvs, is an increasingly recognized disorder with sudden, repeated attacksalso called episodesof severe nausea, vomiting, and physical exhaustion that occur with no apparent cause. the episodes can last from a few hours to several days. episodes can be so severe that a person has to stay in bed for days, unable to go to school or work. a person may need treatment at an emergency room or a hospital during episodes. after an episode, a person usually experiences symptom-free periods lasting a few weeks to several months. to people who have the disorder, as well as their family members and friends, cyclic vomiting syndrome can be disruptive and frightening. the disorder can affect a person for months, years, or decades. each episode of cyclic vomiting syndrome is usually similar to previous ones, meaning that episodes tend to start at the same time of day, last the same length of time, and occur with the same symptoms and level of intensity.<end>
<question>what to do for cyclic vomiting syndrome ?<answer>during the prodrome and vomiting phases of cyclic vomiting syndrome, a person will generally take in little or no nutrition by mouth. during the recovery phase, the person may be quite hungry as soon as the vomiting stops. as eating resumes, a person or his or her family should watch for the return of nausea. in some cases, a person can start with clear liquids and proceed slowly to a regular diet. during the well phase, a balanced diet and regular meals are important. people should avoid any trigger foods and foods with additives. eating small, carbohydrate-containing snacks between meals, before exercise, and at bedtime may help prevent future attacks. a health care provider will assist with planning a return to a regular diet.<end>
<question>what is (are) kidney disease ?<answer>what the kidneys do you have two kidneys. they are bean-shaped and about the size of a fist. they are located in the middle of your back, on the left and right of your spine, just below your rib cage. the kidneys filter your blood, removing wastes and extra water to make urine. they also help control blood pressure and make hormones that your body needs to stay healthy. when the kidneys are damaged, wastes can build up in the body. kidney function and aging kidney function may be reduced with aging. as the kidneys age, the number of filtering units in the kidney may decrease, the overall amount of kidney tissue may decrease, and the blood vessels that supply the kidney may harden, causing the kidneys to filter blood more slowly. if your kidneys begin to filter less well as you age, you may be more likely to have complications from certain medicines. there may be an unsafe buildup of medicines that are removed from your blood by your kidneys. also, your kidneys may be more sensitive to certain medicines. for example, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (nsaids) and some antibiotics may harm your kidneys in some situations. the next time you pick up a prescription or buy an over-the-counter medicine or supplement, ask your pharmacist how the product may affect your kidneys and interact with your other medicines. (watch the video to learn more about what the kidneys do. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) learn more about how the kidneys work. how kidney disease occurs kidney disease means the kidneys are damaged and can no longer remove wastes and extra water from the blood as they should. kidney disease is most often caused by diabetes or high blood pressure. according to the centers for disease control and prevention, more than 20 million americans may have kidney disease. many more are at risk. the main risk factors for developing kidney disease are - diabetes - high blood pressure - cardiovascular (heart and blood vessel) disease - a family history of kidney failure. diabetes high blood pressure cardiovascular (heart and blood vessel) disease a family history of kidney failure. each kidney contains about one million tiny filtering units made up of blood vessels. these filters are called glomeruli. diabetes and high blood pressure damage these blood vessels, so the kidneys are not able to filter the blood as well as they used to. usually this damage happens slowly, over many years. this is called chronic kidney disease. as more and more filtering units are damaged, the kidneys eventually are unable to maintain health. early kidney disease usually has no symptoms, which means you will not feel different. blood and urine tests are the only way to check for kidney damage or measure kidney function. if you have diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, or a family history of kidney failure, you should be tested for kidney disease. kidney failure kidney disease can get worse over time, and may lead to kidney failure. kidney failure means very advanced kidney damage with less than 15% normal function. end-stage renal disease (esrd) is kidney failure treated by dialysis or kidney transplant. if the kidneys fail, treatment options such as dialysis or a kidney transplant can help replace kidney function. some patients choose not to treat kidney failure with dialysis or a transplant. if your kidneys fail, talk with your health care provider about choosing a treatment that is right for you. (watch the video to learn more about how kidney disease progresses. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.)<end>
<question>how to prevent kidney disease ?<answer>risk factors diabetes and high blood pressure are the two leading causes of kidney disease. both diabetes and high blood pressure damage the small blood vessels in your kidneys and can cause kidney disease -- without you feeling it. other risk factors for kidney disease include: - cardiovascular (heart) disease - family history -- if you have a mother, father, sister, or brother who has had kidney failure, then you are at increased risk. cardiovascular (heart) disease family history -- if you have a mother, father, sister, or brother who has had kidney failure, then you are at increased risk. additionally, african americans, hispanics, and native americans are at high risk for developing kidney failure. this is in part due to high rates of diabetes and high blood pressure in these communities. if you have any of these risk factors, talk to your health care provider about getting tested for kidney disease. if you have kidney disease, you may not feel any different. it is very important to get tested if you are at risk. (watch the video to learn more about reducing your risk for kidney disease. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) prevention if you are at risk for kidney disease, the most important steps you can take to keep your kidneys healthy are to - get your blood and urine checked for kidney disease. - manage your diabetes, high blood pressure, and heart disease. get your blood and urine checked for kidney disease. manage your diabetes, high blood pressure, and heart disease. manage your diabetes and high blood pressure, and keep your kidneys healthy by - eating healthy foods: fresh fruits, fresh or frozen vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy foods - cutting back on salt - limiting your alcohol intake - being more physically active - losing weight if you are overweight - taking your medicines the way your provider tells you to - keeping your cholesterol levels in the target range - taking steps to quit, if you smoke - seeing your doctor regularly. eating healthy foods: fresh fruits, fresh or frozen vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy foods cutting back on salt limiting your alcohol intake being more physically active losing weight if you are overweight taking your medicines the way your provider tells you to keeping your cholesterol levels in the target range taking steps to quit, if you smoke seeing your doctor regularly. by following these steps and keeping risk factors under control -- especially your blood pressure -- you may be able to delay or even prevent kidney failure. talk to your health care provider to find out the steps that are right for you. learn about preventing high blood pressure. learn about preventing type 2 diabetes.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for kidney disease ?<answer>many areas of research researchers are working at every stage of kidney disease to improve diagnosis and treatment, including - trying to find a better way to identify who is at greatest risk for rapidly progressing kidney disease - trying to find more effective medications to treat kidney disease and its risk factors, and - improving dialysis and the results of kidney transplantation. trying to find a better way to identify who is at greatest risk for rapidly progressing kidney disease trying to find more effective medications to treat kidney disease and its risk factors, and improving dialysis and the results of kidney transplantation. several areas of research supported by the national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases (niddk) hold great potential. emphasis is being placed on research related to prevention and early intervention in kidney disease. interaction with other diseases another focus is on the interaction between kidney disease, diabetes, and cardiovascular (heart) disease. advances in treatments for diabetes and high blood pressure may help reduce the damage these conditions do to the kidneys in the first place. research into how to predict who will develop kidney disease may improve prevention. disease progression niddk is sponsoring a major study -- the chronic renal insufficiency cohort (cric) study -- to learn more about how kidney disease progresses. cric is following 6,000 adults with mild to moderate kidney disease. about half have diabetes. it is believed that some cric study participants' kidney function will decline more rapidly than others', and that some will develop cardiovascular disease while others won't. the goal of the study is to identify the factors linked to rapid decline of kidney function and the development of cardiovascular disease. the data and specimens collected from study participants will be available to other researchers who are studying kidney disease and cardiovascular disease. the cric study will allow future investigation into the role of genetic, environmental, behavioral, nutritional, and other factors in kidney disease. learn more about the cric study. improving transplants in the area of transplantation, researchers are working to develop new drugs that help the body accept donated organs. the goal is to help transplanted kidneys survive longer and work better. niddk scientists are also developing new techniques to improve the body's tolerance for foreign tissue even before the donated kidney is transplanted. this could help reduce or eliminate the need for drugs that suppress the immune system, which could reduce transplantation costs and complications. in the future, scientists may even develop an artificial kidney for implantation.<end>
<question>what is (are) kidney disease ?<answer>instead of dialysis, some people with kidney failure -- including older adults -- may be able to receive a kidney transplant. this involves having a healthy kidney from another person surgically placed into your body. the new, donated kidney does the work that your two failed kidneys used to do. the donated kidney can come from an anonymous donor who has recently died, or from a living person -- usually a relative. but you might also be able to receive a kidney from an unrelated donor, including your spouse or a friend. (watch the video to learn more about kidney transplantation. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) kidney transplantation is a treatment for kidney failure -- not a cure. you will need to see your healthcare provider regularly. and you will need to take medications for as long as you have your transplant to suppress your immune system so it doesn't reject the transplanted kidney.<end>
<question>what is (are) cataract ?<answer>a clouding of the lens in the eye a cataract is a clouding of the lens in the eye that affects vision. the lens is a clear part of the eye that helps to focus light, or an image, on the retina. the retina is the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye. in a normal eye, light passes through the transparent lens to the retina. once it reaches the retina, light is changed into nerve signals that are sent to the brain. in a normal eye, light passes through the transparent lens to the retina. once it reaches the retina, light is changed into nerve signals that are sent to the brain. a cataract can occur in either or both eyes. it cannot spread from one eye to the other. cataracts and aging most cataracts are related to aging. cataracts are very common in older people. by age 80, more than half of all americans either have a cataract or have had cataract surgery.<end>
<question>who is at risk for cataract? ?<answer>age-related cataracts develop in two ways. - clumps of protein reduce the sharpness of the image reaching the retina. - the clear lens slowly changes to a yellowish/brownish color, adding a brownish tint to vision. clumps of protein reduce the sharpness of the image reaching the retina. the clear lens slowly changes to a yellowish/brownish color, adding a brownish tint to vision. protein clumpings cloud the lens the lens consists mostly of water and protein. when the protein clumps up, it clouds the lens and reduces the light that reaches the retina. the clouding may become severe enough to cause blurred vision. most age-related cataracts develop from protein clumpings. when a cataract is small, the cloudiness affects only a small part of the lens. you may not notice any changes in your vision. cataracts tend to grow slowly, so vision gets worse gradually. over time, the cloudy area in the lens may get larger, and the cataract may increase in size. seeing may become more difficult. your vision may get duller or blurrier. discoloration of the lens cataracts cause the lens to change to a yellowish/brownish color. as the clear lens slowly colors with age, your vision gradually may acquire a brownish shade. at first, the amount of tinting may be small and may not cause a vision problem. over time, increased tinting may make it more difficult to read and perform other routine activities. this gradual change in the amount of tinting does not affect the sharpness of the image transmitted to the retina. if you have advanced lens discoloration, you may not be able to identify blues and purples. you may be wearing what you believe to be a pair of black socks, only to find out from friends that you are wearing purple socks. risk factors the risk of cataract increases as you get older. other risk factors for cataract include - certain diseases like diabetes - personal behavior like smoking or alcohol use - environmental factors such as prolonged exposure to ultraviolet sunlight. certain diseases like diabetes personal behavior like smoking or alcohol use environmental factors such as prolonged exposure to ultraviolet sunlight.<end>
<question>what is (are) cataract ?<answer>a cataract is a clouding of the lens in the eye that affects vision. most cataracts are related to aging. cataracts are very common in older people. by age 80, more than half of all americans either have a cataract or have had cataract surgery. a cataract can occur in either or both eyes. it cannot spread from one eye to the other.<end>
<question>what is (are) cataract ?<answer>national eye institute national institutes of health 2020 vision place bethesda, md 20892-3655 301-496-5248 e-mail: 2020@nei.nih.gov www.nei.nih.gov for more information about intraocular lenses, or iols, contact: u.s. food and drug administration 10903 new hampshire avenue silver spring, md 20993-0002 1-888-463-6332 e-mail: webmail@oc.fda.gov<end>
<question>what is (are) restless legs syndrome ?<answer>restless legs syndrome is a neurological condition that causes an irresistible urge to move the legs. the movement is triggered by strange or uncomfortable feelings, which occur mostly while the affected person is sitting or lying down and are worse at night. movement (i.e. kicking, stretching, rubbing, or pacing) makes the discomfort go away, at least temporarily. many people with restless legs syndrome also experience uncontrollable, repetitive leg movements that occur while they are sleeping or while relaxed or drowsy. researchers have described early-onset and late-onset forms of restless legs syndrome. the early-onset form begins before age 45 and progresses slowly. the late-onset form begins after age 45, and its signs and symptoms tend to worsen more rapidly. restless legs syndrome likely results from a combination of genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors, many of which are unknown. treatment is based on the signs and symptoms present in each person.<end>
<question>what is (are) restless legs syndrome ?<answer>restless legs syndrome (rls) is a disorder that causes a strong urge to move your legs. this urge to move often occurs with strange and unpleasant feelings in your legs. moving your legs relieves the urge and the unpleasant feelings. people who have rls describe the unpleasant feelings as creeping, crawling, pulling, itching, tingling, burning, aching, or electric shocks. sometimes, these feelings also occur in the arms. the urge to move and unpleasant feelings happen when you're resting and inactive. thus, they tend to be worse in the evening and at night. overview rls can make it hard to fall asleep and stay asleep. it may make you feel tired and sleepy during the day. this can make it hard to learn, work, and do other daily activities. not getting enough sleep also can cause depression, mood swings, or other health problems. rls can range from mild to severe based on: the strength of your symptoms and how often they occur how easily moving around relieves your symptoms how much your symptoms disturb your sleep one type of rls usually starts early in life (before 45 years of age) and tends to run in families. it may even start in childhood. once this type of rls starts, it usually lasts for the rest of your life. over time, symptoms slowly get worse and occur more often. if you have a mild case, you may have long periods with no symptoms. another type of rls usually starts later in life (after 45 years of age). it generally doesn't run in families. this type of rls tends to have a more abrupt onset. the symptoms usually don't get worse over time. some diseases, conditions, and medicines may trigger rls. for example, the disorder has been linked to kidney failure, parkinson's disease, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, pregnancy, and iron deficiency. when a disease, condition, or medicine causes rls, the symptoms usually start suddenly. medical conditions or medicines often cause or worsen the type of rls that starts later in life. outlook rls symptoms often get worse over time. however, some people's symptoms go away for weeks to months. if a medical condition or medicine triggers rls, the disorder may go away if the trigger is relieved or stopped. for example, rls that occurs due to pregnancy tends to go away after giving birth. kidney transplants (but not dialysis) relieve rls linked to kidney failure. treatments for rls include lifestyle changes and medicines. some simple lifestyle changes often help relieve mild cases of rls. medicines often can relieve or prevent the symptoms of more severe rls. research is ongoing to better understand the causes of rls and to find better treatments.<end>
<question>how to diagnose restless legs syndrome ?<answer>your doctor will diagnose restless legs syndrome (rls) based on your signs and symptoms, your medical and family histories, a physical exam, and test results. your doctor will use this information to rule out other conditions that have symptoms similar to those of rls. specialists involved your primary care doctor usually can diagnose and treat rls. however, he or she also may suggest that you see a sleep specialist or neurologist. signs and symptoms you must have the four key signs of rls to be diagnosed with the disorder. your doctor will want to know how your symptoms are affecting your sleep and how alert you are during the day. to help your doctor, you may want to keep a sleep diary. use the diary to keep a daily record of how easy it is to fall and stay asleep, how much sleep you get at night, and how alert you feel during the day. for a sample sleep diary, go to the national heart, lung, and blood institute's "your guide to healthy sleep." medical and family histories your doctor may ask whether you have any of the diseases or conditions that can trigger rls. these include kidney failure, parkinson's disease, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, pregnancy, and iron deficiency. your doctor also may want to know what medicines you take. some medicines can trigger or worsen rls. the most common type of rls tends to run in families. thus, your doctor may ask whether any of your relatives have rls. physical exam your doctor will do a physical exam to check for underlying conditions that may trigger rls. he or she also will check for other conditions that have symptoms similar to those of rls. diagnostic tests currently, no test can diagnose rls. still, your doctor may recommend blood tests to measure your iron levels. he or she also may suggest muscle or nerve tests. these tests can show whether you have a condition that can worsen rls or that has symptoms similar to those of rls. rarely, sleep studies are used to help diagnose rls. a sleep study measures how much and how well you sleep. although rls can cause a lack of sleep, this sign isn't specific enough to diagnose the condition. researchers continue to study new ways to diagnose rls. drug therapy trial if your doctor thinks you have rls, he or she may prescribe certain medicines to relieve your symptoms. these medicines, which are used to treat people who have parkinson's disease, also can relieve rls symptoms. if the medicines relieve your symptoms, your doctor can confirm that you have rls.<end>
<question>is restless legs syndrome inherited ?<answer>the inheritance pattern of restless legs syndrome is usually unclear because many genetic and environmental factors can be involved. the disorder often runs in families: 40 to 90 percent of affected individuals report having at least one affected first-degree relative, such as a parent or sibling, and many families have multiple affected family members. studies suggest that the early-onset form of the disorder is more likely to run in families than the late-onset form. in some affected families, restless legs syndrome appears to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. autosomal dominant inheritance suggests that one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. however, the genetic changes associated with restless legs syndrome in these families have not been identified.<end>
<question>what is (are) dry mouth ?<answer>dry mouth is the feeling that there is not enough saliva in the mouth. everyone has dry mouth once in a while -- if they are nervous, upset, under stress, or taking certain medications. but if you have dry mouth all or most of the time, see a dentist or physician. many older adults have dry mouth, but it is not a normal part of aging. (watch the video to learn more about dry mouth. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) why saliva is important saliva does more than keep your mouth wet. it protects teeth from decay, helps heal sores in your mouth, and prevents infection by controlling bacteria, viruses, and fungi in the mouth. saliva helps digest food and helps us chew and swallow. saliva is involved in taste perception as well. each of these functions of saliva is hampered when a person has dry mouth. how dry mouth feels dry mouth can be uncomfortable. some people notice a sticky, dry feeling in the mouth. others notice a burning feeling or difficulty while eating. the throat may feel dry, too, making swallowing difficult and choking common. also, people with dry mouth may get mouth sores, cracked lips, and a dry, rough tongue.<end>
<question>what causes dry mouth ?<answer>people get dry mouth when the glands in the mouth that make saliva are not working properly. because of this, there might not be enough saliva to keep your mouth healthy. there are several reasons why these glands, called salivary glands, might not work right. medicines and dry mouth more than 400 medicines, including some over-the-counter medications, can cause the salivary glands to make less saliva, or to change the composition of the saliva so that it can't perform the functions it should. as an example, medicines for urinary incontinence, allergies, high blood pressure, and depression often cause dry mouth. diseases that can cause dry mouth some diseases can affect the salivary glands. dry mouth can occur in patients with diabetes. dry mouth is also the hallmark symptom of the fairly common autoimmune disease sjgren's syndrome. sjgren's syndrome can occur either by itself or with another autoimmune disease like rheumatoid arthritis or lupus. salivary and tear glands are the major targets of the syndrome and the result is a decrease in production of saliva and tears. the disorder can occur at any age, but the average person with the disorder at the sjgren's syndrome clinic of the national institute of dental and craniofacial research (nidcr) is in his or her late 50s. women with the disorder outnumber men 9 to 1. cancer treatments and dry mouth certain cancer treatments can affect the salivary glands. head and neck radiation therapy can cause the glands to produce little or no saliva. chemotherapy may cause the salivary glands to produce thicker saliva, which makes the mouth feel dry and sticky. injury to the head or neck can damage the nerves that tell salivary glands to make saliva.<end>
<question>what causes dry mouth ?<answer>dry mouth can cause several problems, including difficulty tasting, chewing, swallowing, and speaking. swallowing may be especially difficult for those with too little saliva. for example, people with dry mouth may be unable to swallow dry food at all unless they also drink fluids with food. they also need to take small bites of food and be very aware of chewing and swallowing so they don't choke. dry mouth may also increase the chance of developing dental decay as well as oral fungal infections such as thrush, which causes painful white patches in the mouth.<end>
<question>what is (are) dry mouth ?<answer>national institute of dental and craniofacial research 1 nohic way bethesda, md 20892-3500 (301) 402-7364 http://www.nidcr.nih.gov<end>
<question>what is (are) celiac disease ?<answer>celiac disease is an immune disease in which people can't eat gluten because it will damage their small intestine. if you have celiac disease and eat foods with gluten, your immune system responds by damaging the small intestine. gluten is a protein found in wheat, rye, and barley. it is found mainly in foods but may also be in other products like medicines, vitamins and supplements, lip balm, and even the glue on stamps and envelopes. celiac disease affects each person differently. symptoms may occur in the digestive system, or in other parts of the body. one person might have diarrhea and abdominal pain, while another person may be irritable or depressed. irritability is one of the most common symptoms in children. some people have no symptoms. celiac disease is genetic. blood tests can help your doctor diagnose the disease. your doctor may also need to examine a small piece of tissue from your small intestine. treatment is a diet free of gluten. nih: national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases<end>
<question>what is (are) celiac disease ?<answer>celiac disease is a condition in which the immune system is abnormally sensitive to gluten, a protein found in wheat, rye, and barley. celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder; autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own tissues and organs. without a strict, lifelong gluten-free diet, inflammation resulting from immune system overactivity may cause a wide variety of signs and symptoms involving many parts of the body. celiac disease can develop at any age after an individual starts eating foods containing gluten. the classic symptoms of the condition result from inflammation affecting the gastrointestinal tract. this inflammation damages the villi, which are small, finger-like projections that line the small intestine and provide a greatly increased surface area to absorb nutrients. in celiac disease, the villi become shortened and eventually flatten out. intestinal damage causes diarrhea and poor absorption of nutrients, which may lead to weight loss. abdominal pain, swelling (distention), and food intolerances are common in celiac disease. inflammation associated with celiac disease may lead to an increased risk of developing certain gastrointestinal cancers such as cancers of the small intestine or esophagus. inflammation and poor nutrient absorption may lead to problems affecting many other organs and systems of the body in affected individuals. these health problems may include iron deficiency that results in a low number of red blood cells (anemia), vitamin deficiencies, low bone mineral density (osteoporosis), itchy skin rashes (dermatitis herpetiformis), defects in the enamel of the teeth, chronic fatigue, joint pain, poor growth, delayed puberty, infertility, or repeated miscarriages. neurological problems have also been associated with celiac disease; these include migraine headaches, depression, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd), and recurrent seizures (epilepsy). many people with celiac disease have one or more of these varied health problems but do not have gastrointestinal symptoms. this form of the condition is called nonclassic celiac disease. researchers now believe that nonclassic celiac disease is actually more common than the classic form. celiac disease often goes undiagnosed because many of its signs and symptoms are nonspecific, which means they may occur in many disorders. most people who have one or more of these nonspecific health problems do not have celiac disease. on average, a diagnosis of celiac disease is not made until 6 to 10 years after symptoms begin. some people have silent celiac disease, in which they have no symptoms of the disorder. however, people with silent celiac disease do have immune proteins in their blood (antibodies) that are common in celiac disease. they also have inflammatory damage to their small intestine that can be detected with a biopsy. in a small number of cases, celiac disease does not improve with a gluten-free diet and progresses to a condition called refractory sprue. refractory sprue is characterized by chronic inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract, poor absorption of nutrients, and an increased risk of developing a type of cancer of the immune cells called t-cell lymphoma.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for celiac disease ?<answer>these resources address the diagnosis or management of celiac disease: - beth israel deaconess: celiac center - columbia university celiac disease center - gene review: gene review: celiac disease - genetic testing registry: celiac disease - massachusetts general hospital center for celiac research and treatment - medlineplus encyclopedia: celiac disease nutritional considerations - north american society for pediatric gastroenterology, hepatology, and nutrition: gluten-free diet guide - university of chicago celiac disease center these resources from medlineplus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions: - diagnostic tests - drug therapy - surgery and rehabilitation - genetic counseling - palliative care<end>
<question>what to do for celiac disease ?<answer>eating, diet, and nutrition play a significant role in treating celiac disease. people with the disease should maintain a gluten-free diet by avoiding products that contain gluten. in other words, a person with celiac disease should not eat most grains, pasta, and cereal, and many processed foods. people with celiac disease can eat a wellbalanced diet with a variety of foods. they can use potato, rice, soy, amaranth, quinoa, buckwheat, or bean flour instead of wheat flour. they can buy gluten-free bread, pasta, and other products from stores, or order products from special food companies. meanwhile, "plain"meaning no additives or seasoningsmeat, fish, rice, fruits, and vegetables do not contain gluten, so people with celiac disease can eat these foods. in the past, health care providers and dietitians advised people with celiac disease to avoid eating oats. evidence suggests that most people with the disease can safely eat small amounts of oats, as long as the oats are not contaminated with wheat gluten during processing. people with celiac disease should talk with their health care team when deciding whether to include oats in their diet. eating out and shopping can be a challenge. newly diagnosed people and their families may find support groups helpful as they adjust to a new approach to eating. people with celiac disease should - read food labelsespecially canned, frozen, and processed foodsfor ingredients that contain gluten - avoid ingredients such as hydrolyzed vegetable protein, also called lecithin or soy lecithin - ask restaurant servers and chefs about ingredients and food preparation inquire whether a gluten-free menu is available - ask a dinner or party host about glutenfree options before attending a social gathering foods that are packaged as gluten-free tend to cost more than the same foods containing gluten. people following a gluten-free diet may find that naturally gluten-free foods are less expensive. with practice, looking for gluten can become second nature. the gluten-free diet: some examples the academy of nutrition and dietetics has published recommendations for a glutenfree diet. the following chart illustrates these recommendations. this list is not complete, so people with celiac disease should discuss gluten-free food choices with a dietitian or health care professional who specializes in celiac disease. people with celiac disease should always read food ingredient lists carefully to make sure the food does not contain gluten. table 1. gluten-free foods and foods that contain gluten foods and ingredients that contain gluten barley rye triticale (a cross between wheat and rye) wheat, including - including einkorn, emmer, spelt, kamut - wheat starch, wheat bran, wheat germ, cracked wheat, hydrolyzed wheat protein brewer's yeast dextrin malt (unless a gluten-free source is named, such as corn malt) modified food starch oats (not labeled gluten-free) starch other wheat products that contain gluten bromated flour durum flour enriched flour farina graham flour phosphated flour plain flour self-rising flour semolina white flour processed foods that may contain wheat, barley, or rye* bouillon cubes brown rice syrup candy chewing gum chips/potato chips cold cuts, hot dogs, salami, sausage communion wafers french fries gravies imitation fish matzo and matzo meal rice mixes sauces seasoned tortilla chips self-basting turkey soups soy sauce vegetables in sauce *most of these foods can be found gluten-free. when in doubt, check with the food manufacturer. food products and ingredients made from barley* ale beer malt malt beverages malted milk malt extract malt syrup malt vinegar other fermented beverages porter stout *people should only consume these foods if they are labeled gluten-freesuch as sorghum-based beeror they list a grain source other than barley, wheat, or ryesuch as corn malt. foods that do not contain gluten amaranth arrowroot buckwheat cassava corn flax legumes lentils millet nuts oats (labeled gluten-free) potatoes quinoa rice sago seeds sorghum soy tapioca tef (or teff) wild rice yucca food labeling requirements on august 2, 2013, the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) published a new regulation defining the term "glutenfree" for voluntary food labeling. this new federal definition standardizes the meaning of "gluten-free" foods regulated by the fda. foods regulated by the u.s. department of agriculture, including meat and egg products, are not subject to this regulation. the regulation requires that any food with the term "gluten-free" on the label must meet all of the requirements of the definition, including that the food should contain fewer than 20 parts per million of gluten. the fda rule also requires foods with the claims "no gluten," "free of gluten," and "without gluten" to meet the definition for "gluten-free." if a food that is labeled "gluten-free" includes "wheat" on the ingredients list or "contains wheat" after the list, the following statement must be included on the label: "the wheat has been processed to allow this food to meet the food and drug administration requirements for gluten-free food." if this statement is included, people with celiac disease may consume foods labeled "gluten-free."<end>
<question>what is (are) copd ?<answer>chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or copd, is a progressive lung disease in which the airways of the lungs become damaged, making it hard to breathe. you may also have heard copd called other names, like emphysema or chronic bronchitis. in people who have copd, the airways that carry air in and out of the lungs are partially blocked, making it difficult to get air in and out. copd is a major cause of death and illness throughout the world. it kills more than 120,000 americans each year. that's one death every 4 minutes. how copd affects airways the "airways" are the tubes that carry air in and out of the lungs through the nose and mouth. the airways of the lungs branch out like an upside-down tree. at the end of each branch are many small, balloon-like air sacs. in healthy people, the airways and air sacs are elastic (stretchy). when you breathe in, each air sac fills up with air, like a small balloon, and when you breathe out, the balloon deflates and the air goes out. in people with copd, the airways and air sacs lose their shape and become floppy. less air gets in and less air goes out of the airways because - the airways and air sacs lose their elasticity like an old rubber band. - the walls between many of the air sacs are destroyed. - the walls of the airways become thick and inflamed or swollen. - cells in the airways make more mucus or sputum than usual, which tends to clog the airways. the airways and air sacs lose their elasticity like an old rubber band. the walls between many of the air sacs are destroyed. the walls of the airways become thick and inflamed or swollen. cells in the airways make more mucus or sputum than usual, which tends to clog the airways. copd develops slowly, has no cure when copd is severe, shortness of breath and other symptoms of copd can get in the way of even the most basic tasks, such as doing light housework, taking a walk, even washing and dressing. copd develops slowly, and it may be many years before you notice symptoms like feeling short of breath. most of the time, copd is diagnosed in middle-aged or older people. there is no cure for copd. the damage to your airways and lungs cannot be reversed, but there are things you can do to control the disabling effects of the disease. copd is not contagious. you cannot catch it from someone else.<end>
<question>what causes copd ?<answer>smoking most cases of copd develop over time, from breathing in fumes and other things that irritate the lungs. some of the things that put you at risk for copd include smoking, environmental exposure, and genetic factors. cigarette smoking is the most common cause of copd in the united states (either current or former smokers). pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoking can also cause copd, especially if the smoke is inhaled. environmental exposure copd can also occur in people who have had long-term exposure to things that can irritate your lungs, like chemical fumes, or dust from the environment or workplace. heavy or long-term exposure to secondhand smoke or other air pollutants may also contribute to copd even if you have never smoked or had long-term exposure to harmful pollutants. secondhand smoke is smoke in the air from other people smoking. genetic factors in a small number of people, copd is caused by a genetic condition known as alpha-1 antitrypsin, or aat, deficiency. people who have this condition have low levels of alpha-1 antitrypsin (aat)a protein made in the liver. having a low level of the aat protein can lead to lung damage and copd if you're exposed to smoke or other lung irritants. if you have this condition and smoke, copd can worsen very quickly. while very few people know if they have aat deficiency, it is estimated that about 1 in every 1,600 people to about 1 in every 5,000 people have it. people with aat deficiency can get copd even if they have never smoked or had long-term exposure to harmful pollutants. asthma although uncommon, some people who have asthma can develop copd. asthma is a chronic (long-term) lung disease that inflames and narrows the airways. treatment usually can reverse the inflammation and narrowing. however, if not, copd can develop.<end>
<question>what causes copd ?<answer>copd is a disease that slowly worsens over time, especially if you continue to smoke. if you have copd, you are more likely to have lung infections, which can be fatal. if the lungs are severely damaged, the heart may be affected. a person with copd dies when the lungs and heart are unable to function and get oxygen to the body's organs and tissues, or when a complication, such as a severe infection, occurs. treatment for copd may help prevent complications, prolong life, and improve a person's quality of life.<end>
<question>what is (are) copd ?<answer>more information on copd is available at: what is copd? and at the learn more, breathe better campaign for information on quitting smoking, visit http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/tobacco/ or smokefree.gov. for information on the h1n1 flu and copd, go to the centers for disease control and prevention.<end>
<question>what is (are) balance problems ?<answer>have you ever felt dizzy, lightheaded, or as if the room were spinning around you? these can be very troublesome sensations. if the feeling happens often, it could be a sign of a balance problem. balance problems are among the most common reasons that older adults seek help from a doctor. in 2008, an estimated 14.8 percent of american adults (33.4 million) had a balance or dizziness problem during the past year. why good balance is important having good balance means being able to control and maintain your body's position, whether you are moving or remaining still. an intact sense of balance helps you - walk without staggering - get up from a chair without falling - climb stairs without tripping - bend over without falling. walk without staggering get up from a chair without falling climb stairs without tripping bend over without falling. the part of the inner ear responsible for balance is the vestibular system, often referred to as the labyrinth. to maintain your body's position, the labyrinth interacts with other systems in the body, such as the eyes, bones and joints. good balance is important to help you get around, stay independent, and carry out daily activities. learn how your body maintains its balance. when people have problems with balance as they get older, many people experience problems with their sense of balance. they feel dizzy or unsteady, or as if they or their surroundings were in motion. disturbances of the inner ear are a common cause. vertigo, the feeling that you or the things around you are spinning, is also a common symptom. balance disorders are one reason older people fall. falls and fall-related injuries, such as hip fracture, can have a serious impact on an older person's life. if you fall, it could limit your activities or make it impossible to live independently. many people often become more isolated after a fall. according to the centers for disease control and prevention, roughly more than one-third of adults ages 65 years and older fall each year. among older adults, falls are the leading cause of injury-related deaths. learn other ways a fall may affect an older adult's life. bppv (benign paroxysmal positional vertigo) there are many types of balance disorders. one of the most common is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, or bppv. in bppv, you experience a brief, intense feeling of vertigo when you change the position of your head, such as when rolling over to the left or right, upon getting out of bed, or when looking for an object on a high or low shelf. bppv is more likely to occur in adults aged 60 and older, but can also occur in younger people. in bppv, small calcium particles in the inner ear become displaced and disrupt the inner ear balance sensors, causing dizziness. the reason they become displaced is not known; the cause may be an inner ear infection, head injury, or aging. labyrinthitis this is an infection or inflammation of the inner ear that causes dizziness and loss of balance. it is often associated with an upper respiratory infection such as the flu. mnire's disease mnire's disease is a balance disorder that causes a person to experience - vertigo - hearing loss that comes and goes - tinnitus, which is a ringing or roaring in the ears - a feeling of fullness in the ear. vertigo hearing loss that comes and goes tinnitus, which is a ringing or roaring in the ears a feeling of fullness in the ear. it affects adults of any age. the cause is unknown. see a fuller list of balance disorders. there are many ways to treat balance disorders. treatments vary depending on the cause. see your doctor if you are experiencing dizziness, vertigo, or other problems with your balance.<end>
<question>how to prevent balance problems ?<answer>people are more likely to have problems with balance as they get older. but age is not the only reason these problems occur; there are other causes, too. in some cases, you can help reduce your risk for certain balance problems. problems in the inner ear some balance disorders are caused by problems in the inner ear. the part of the inner ear that is responsible for balance is the vestibular system, also known as the labyrinth. when the labyrinth becomes infected or swollen, this condition is called labyrinthitis. it is typically accompanied by vertigo and imbalance. upper respiratory infections and other viral infections, and, less commonly, bacterial infections, can lead to labyrinthitis. other causes other balance diseorers may involve another part of the body, such as the brain or the heart. for example, diseases of the circulatory system, such as stroke, can cause dizziness and other balance problems. smoking and diabetes can increase the risk of stroke. low blood pressure can also cause dizziness. aging, infections, head injury and many medicines may also result in a balance problem. problems caused by medications balance problems can also result from taking many medications. for example, some medicines, such as those that help lower blood pressure, can make a person feel dizzy. ototoxic drugs are medicines that damage the inner ear. if your medicine is ototoxic, you may feel off balance. sometimes the damage lasts only as long as you take the drug; many times it is permanent. groups of drugs that are more likely to be ototoxic include - antidepressants - anti-seizure drugs (anticonvulsants) - hypertensive (high blood pressure) drugs - sedatives - tranquilizers - anxiolytics (anti-anxiety drugs) - aminoglycosides (a type of antibiotic) - diuretics - vasodilators - certain analgesics (painkillers) - certain chemotherapeutics (anti-cancer drugs). antidepressants anti-seizure drugs (anticonvulsants) hypertensive (high blood pressure) drugs sedatives tranquilizers anxiolytics (anti-anxiety drugs) aminoglycosides (a type of antibiotic) diuretics vasodilators certain analgesics (painkillers) certain chemotherapeutics (anti-cancer drugs). check with your doctor if you notice a problem while taking a medication. ask if other medications can be used instead. if not, ask if the dosage can be safely reduced. sometimes it cannot. however, your doctor will help you get the medication you need while trying to reduce unwanted side effects. diet and lifestyle can help your diet and lifestyle can help you manage certain balance-related problems. for example, mnire's disease, which causes vertigo and other balance and hearing problems, is linked to a change in the volume of fluid in the inner ear. by eating low-salt (low-sodium) or salt-free foods, and steering clear of caffeine and alcohol, you may make mnire's disease symptoms less severe. see suggestions for limiting salt (sodium) in your diet. balance problems due to high blood pressure can be managed by eating less salt (less sodium), maintaining a healthy weight, and exercising. balance problems due to low blood pressure may be managed by drinking plenty of fluids, such as water, avoiding alcohol, and being cautious regarding your body's posture and movement, such as standing up slowly and avoiding crossing your legs when youre seated. learn more about managing high blood pressure (hypertension). learn more about manging low blood pressure (hypotension). prevent ear infections the ear infection called otitis media is common in children, but adults can get it too. otitis media can sometimes cause dizziness. you can help prevent otitis media by washing your hands frequently. also, talk to your doctor about getting a yearly flu shot to stave off flu-related ear infections. if you still get an ear infection, see a doctor immediately before it becomes more serious. learn more about otitis media and other ear infections. (centers for disease control and prevention)<end>
<question>how many people are affected by balance problems ?<answer>in 2008, an estimated 14.8 percent of american adults (33.4 million) had a balance or dizziness problem during the past year. see statistics about the frequency of balance and other sensory impairments in older adults. (centers for disease control and prevention)<end>
<question>how to prevent balance problems ?<answer>scientists are working to understand the complex interactions between the brain and the part of the inner ear responsible for balance. they are also studying the effectiveness of certain exercises as a treatment option for balance disorders. an nidcd-supported clinical trial in benign paroxysmal positioning vertigo (bppv) showed that repositioning maneuvers work well, and offered clinicians a range of choices in selecting the treatment best suited to each individuals unique needs. nidcd-funded researchers have created a virtual reality grocery store. this virtual store is a computer-simulated environment that seems to be a physical place in the real world. it is designed so people with balance disorders can safely walk on a treadmill as they practice looking for items on store shelves. the goal is to help reduce a person's dizziness in confusing environments. nidcd-supported scientists are also studying the use of a vestibular implant to stop a mnires attack by restoring normal electrical activity in the vestibular nerve. this nerve conveys balance information to the brain. the device uses the same technology found in a cochlear implant, a medical device that currently provides a sense of sound to people who are deaf or hard-of-hearing.<end>
<question>what is (are) porphyria ?<answer>porphyrias are a group of genetic disorders caused by problems with how your body makes a substance called heme. heme is found throughout the body, especially in your blood and bone marrow, where it carries oxygen. there are two main types of porphyrias. one affects the skin and the other affects the nervous system. people with the skin type develop blisters, itching, and swelling of their skin when it is exposed to sunlight. the nervous system type is called acute porphyria. symptoms include pain in the chest, abdomen, limbs, or back; muscle numbness, tingling, paralysis, or cramping; vomiting; constipation; and personality changes or mental disorders. these symptoms come and go. certain triggers can cause an attack, including some medicines, smoking, drinking alcohol, infections, stress, and sun exposure. attacks develop over hours or days. they can last for days or weeks. porphyria can be hard to diagnose. it requires blood, urine, and stool tests. each type of porphyria is treated differently. treatment may involve avoiding triggers, receiving heme through a vein, taking medicines to relieve symptoms, or having blood drawn to reduce iron in the body. people who have severe attacks may need to be hospitalized. nih: national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases<end>
<question>what is (are) porphyria ?<answer>porphyria is a group of disorders caused by abnormalities in the chemical steps that lead to heme production. heme is a vital molecule for all of the body's organs, although it is most abundant in the blood, bone marrow, and liver. heme is a component of several iron-containing proteins called hemoproteins, including hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen in the blood). researchers have identified several types of porphyria, which are distinguished by their genetic cause and their signs and symptoms. some types of porphyria, called cutaneous porphyrias, primarily affect the skin. areas of skin exposed to the sun become fragile and blistered, which can lead to infection, scarring, changes in skin coloring (pigmentation), and increased hair growth. cutaneous porphyrias include congenital erythropoietic porphyria, erythropoietic protoporphyria, hepatoerythropoietic porphyria, and porphyria cutanea tarda. other types of porphyria, called acute porphyrias, primarily affect the nervous system. these disorders are described as "acute" because their signs and symptoms appear quickly and usually last a short time. episodes of acute porphyria can cause abdominal pain, vomiting, constipation, and diarrhea. during an episode, a person may also experience muscle weakness, seizures, fever, and mental changes such as anxiety and hallucinations. these signs and symptoms can be life-threatening, especially if the muscles that control breathing become paralyzed. acute porphyrias include acute intermittent porphyria and alad deficiency porphyria. two other forms of porphyria, hereditary coproporphyria and variegate porphyria, can have both acute and cutaneous symptoms. the porphyrias can also be split into erythropoietic and hepatic types, depending on where damaging compounds called porphyrins and porphyrin precursors first build up in the body. in erythropoietic porphyrias, these compounds originate in the bone marrow. erythropoietic porphyrias include erythropoietic protoporphyria and congenital erythropoietic porphyria. health problems associated with erythropoietic porphyrias include a low number of red blood cells (anemia) and enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly). the other types of porphyrias are considered hepatic porphyrias. in these disorders, porphyrins and porphyrin precursors originate primarily in the liver, leading to abnormal liver function and an increased risk of developing liver cancer. environmental factors can strongly influence the occurrence and severity of signs and symptoms of porphyria. alcohol, smoking, certain drugs, hormones, other illnesses, stress, and dieting or periods without food (fasting) can all trigger the signs and symptoms of some forms of the disorder. additionally, exposure to sunlight worsens the skin damage in people with cutaneous porphyrias.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for porphyria ?<answer>these resources address the diagnosis or management of porphyria: - gene review: gene review: acute intermittent porphyria - gene review: gene review: congenital erythropoietic porphyria - gene review: gene review: erythropoietic protoporphyria, autosomal recessive - gene review: gene review: hereditary coproporphyria - gene review: gene review: porphyria cutanea tarda, type ii - gene review: gene review: variegate porphyria - gene review: gene review: x-linked protoporphyria - genetic testing registry: acute intermittent porphyria - genetic testing registry: congenital erythropoietic porphyria - genetic testing registry: erythropoietic protoporphyria - genetic testing registry: familial porphyria cutanea tarda - genetic testing registry: hereditary coproporphyria - genetic testing registry: porphyria - genetic testing registry: protoporphyria, erythropoietic, x-linked - genetic testing registry: variegate porphyria - medlineplus encyclopedia: porphyria - medlineplus encyclopedia: porphyria cutanea tarda on the hands - medlineplus encyclopedia: porphyrins - blood - medlineplus encyclopedia: porphyrins - urine these resources from medlineplus offer information about the diagnosis and management of various health conditions: - diagnostic tests - drug therapy - surgery and rehabilitation - genetic counseling - palliative care<end>
<question>what to do for porphyria ?<answer>people with an acute porphyria should eat a diet with an average-to-high level of carbohydrates. the recommended dietary allowance for carbohydrates is 130 g per day for adults and children 1 year of age or older; pregnant and breastfeeding women need higher intakes.2 people should avoid limiting intake of carbohydrates and calories, even for short periods of time, as this type of dieting or fasting can trigger symptoms. people with an acute porphyria who want to lose weight should talk with their health care providers about diets they can follow to lose weight gradually. people undergoing therapeutic phlebotomies should drink plenty of milk, water, or juice before and after each procedure. a health care provider may recommend vitamin and mineral supplements for people with a cutaneous porphyria.<end>
<question>what is (are) ewing sarcoma ?<answer>key points - ewing sarcoma is a type of tumor that forms in bone or soft tissue. - signs and symptoms of ewing sarcoma include swelling and pain near the tumor. - tests that examine the bone and soft tissue are used to diagnose and stage ewing sarcoma. - a biopsy is done to diagnose ewing sarcoma. - certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery). ewing sarcoma is a type of tumor that forms in bone or soft tissue. ewing sarcoma is a type of tumor that forms from a certain kind of cell in bone or soft tissue. ewing sarcoma may be found in the bones of the legs, arms, feet, hands, chest, pelvis, spine, or skull. ewing sarcoma also may be found in the soft tissue of the trunk, arms, legs, head and neck, abdominal cavity, or other areas. ewing sarcoma is most common in adolescents and young adults. ewing sarcoma has also been called peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, askin tumor (ewing sarcoma of the chest wall), extraosseous ewing sarcoma (ewing sarcoma in tissue other than bone), and ewing sarcoma family of tumors.<end>
<question>how to diagnose ewing sarcoma ?<answer>tests that examine the bone and soft tissue are used to diagnose and stage ewing sarcoma. procedures that make pictures of the bones and soft tissues and nearby areas help diagnose ewing sarcoma and show how far the cancer has spread. the process used to find out if cancer cells have spread within and around the bones and soft tissues is called staging. in order to plan treatment, it is important to know if the cancer is in the area where it first formed or if it has spread to other parts of the body. tests and procedures to detect, diagnose, and stage ewing sarcoma are usually done at the same time. the following tests and procedures may be used to diagnose or stage ewing sarcoma: - physical exam and history : an exam of the body to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps or anything else that seems unusual. a history of the patients health habits and past illnesses and treatments will also be taken. - mri (magnetic resonance imaging): a procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the area where the tumor formed. this procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (nmri). - ct scan (cat scan): a procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, such as the area where the tumor formed or the chest, taken from different angles. the pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. a dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. this procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - pet scan (positron emission tomography scan): a procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. a small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. the pet scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. a pet scan and a ct scan are often done at the same time. if there is any cancer, this increases the chance that it will be found. - bone scan : a procedure to check if there are rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer cells, in the bone. a very small amount of radioactive material is injected into a vein and travels through the bloodstream. the radioactive material collects in the bones with cancer and is detected by a scanner. - bone marrow aspiration and biopsy : the removal of bone marrow and a small piece of bone by inserting a hollow needle into the hipbone. samples are removed from both hipbones. a pathologist views the bone marrow and bone under a microscope to see if the cancer has spread. - x-ray: an x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body, such as the chest or the area where the tumor formed. - complete blood count (cbc): a procedure in which a sample of blood is drawn and checked for the following: - the number of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. - the amount of hemoglobin (the protein that carries oxygen) in the red blood cells. - the portion of the blood sample made up of red blood cells. - blood chemistry studies : a procedure in which a blood sample is checked to measure the amounts of certain substances, such as lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), released into the blood by organs and tissues in the body. an unusual (higher or lower than normal) amount of a substance can be a sign of disease. a biopsy is done to diagnose ewing sarcoma. tissue samples are removed during a biopsy so they can be viewed under a microscope by a pathologist to check for signs of cancer. it is helpful if the biopsy is done at the same center where treatment will be given. - needle biopsy : for a needle biopsy, tissue is removed using a needle. this type of needle biopsy may be done if its possible to remove tissue samples large enough to be used for testing. - incisional biopsy : for an incisional biopsy, a sample of tissue is removed through an incision in the skin. - excisional biopsy : the removal of an entire lump or area of tissue that doesnt look normal. the specialists (pathologist, radiation oncologist, and surgeon) who will treat the patient usually work together to decide where the needle should be placed or the biopsy incision should be made. this is done so that the biopsy doesn't affect later treatment such as surgery to remove the tumor or radiation therapy. if there is a chance that the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes, one or more lymph nodes may be removed and checked for signs of cancer. the following tests may be done on the tissue that is removed: - cytogenetic analysis : a laboratory test in which cells in a sample of tissue are viewed under a microscope to look for certain changes in the chromosomes. - immunohistochemistry : a test that uses antibodies to check for certain antigens in a sample of tissue. the antibody is usually linked to a radioactive substance or a dye that causes the tissue to light up under a microscope. this type of test may be used to tell the difference between different types of cancer. - flow cytometry : a laboratory test that measures the number of cells in a sample, the percentage of live cells in a sample, and certain characteristics of cells, such as size, shape, and the presence of tumor markers on the cell surface. the cells are stained with a light-sensitive dye, placed in a fluid, and passed in a stream before a laser or other type of light. the measurements are based on how the light-sensitive dye reacts to the light.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for ewing sarcoma ?<answer>key points - there are different types of treatment for children with ewing sarcoma. - children with ewing sarcoma should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating cancer in children. - treatment for ewing sarcoma may cause side effects. - five types of standard treatment are used: - chemotherapy - radiation therapy - surgery - targeted therapy - high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue - new types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. - chimeric antigen receptor (car) t-cell therapy - patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. - patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. - follow-up tests may be needed. there are different types of treatment for children with ewing sarcoma. different types of treatments are available for children with ewing sarcoma. some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials. a treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer. when clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the standard treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment. because cancer in children is rare, taking part in a clinical trial should be considered. some clinical trials are open only to patients who have not started treatment. children with ewing sarcoma should have their treatment planned by a team of health care providers who are experts in treating cancer in children. treatment will be overseen by a pediatric oncologist, a doctor who specializes in treating children with cancer. the pediatric oncologist works with other health care providers who are experts in treating children with ewing sarcoma and who specialize in certain areas of medicine. these may include the following specialists: - pediatrician. - surgical oncologist or orthopedic oncologist. - radiation oncologist. - pediatric nurse specialist. - social worker. - rehabilitation specialist. - psychologist. treatment for ewing sarcoma may cause side effects. for information about side effects that begin during treatment for cancer, see our side effects page. side effects from cancer treatment that begin after treatment and continue for months or years are called late effects. late effects of cancer treatment may include the following: - physical problems. - changes in mood, feelings, thinking, learning, or memory. - second cancers (new types of cancer). patients treated for ewing sarcoma have an increased risk of acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. there is also an increased risk of sarcoma in the area treated with radiation therapy. some late effects may be treated or controlled. it is important to talk with your child's doctors about the effects cancer treatment can have on your child. (see the pdq summary on late effects of treatment for childhood cancer for more information.) five types of standard treatment are used: chemotherapy chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping them from dividing. when chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy). when chemotherapy is placed directly into the cerebrospinal fluid, an organ, or a body cavity such as the abdomen, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas (regional chemotherapy). combination chemotherapy is treatment using more than one anticancer drug. systemic chemotherapy is part of the treatment for all patients with ewing tumors. it is often the first treatment given and lasts for about 6 to 12 months. chemotherapy is often given to shrink the tumor before surgery or radiation therapy and to kill any tumor cells that may have spread to other parts of the body. see drugs approved for soft tissue sarcoma for more information. radiation therapy radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells or keep them from growing. there are two types of radiation therapy: - external radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer. - internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer. external radiation therapy is used to treat ewing sarcoma. radiation therapy is used when the tumor cannot be removed by surgery or when surgery to remove the tumor will affect important body functions or the way the child will look. it may be used to make the tumor smaller and decrease the amount of tissue that needs to be removed during surgery. it may also be used to treat any tumor that remains after surgery and tumors that have spread to other parts of the body. surgery surgery is usually done to remove cancer that is left after chemotherapy or radiation therapy. when possible, the whole tumor is removed by surgery. tissue and bone that are removed may be replaced with a graft, which uses tissue and bone taken from another part of the patient's body or a donor. sometimes an implant, such as artificial bone, is used. even if the doctor removes all of the cancer that can be seen at the time of the operation, chemotherapy or radiation therapy may be given after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left. chemotherapy or radiation therapy given after surgery to lower the risk that the cancer will come back is called adjuvant therapy. targeted therapy targeted therapy is a type of treatment that uses drugs or other substances to identify and attack specific cancer cells without harming normal cells. monoclonal antibody therapy is a type of targeted therapy used in the treatment of recurrent ewing sarcoma. it is being studied for the treatment of metastatic ewing sarcoma. monoclonal antibodies are made in the laboratory from a single type of immune system cell. these antibodies can identify substances on cancer cells or normal substances that may help cancer cells grow. the antibodies attach to the substances and kill the cancer cells, block their growth, or keep them from spreading. monoclonal antibodies are given by infusion. they may be used alone or to carry drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to cancer cells. new types of targeted therapy are being studied. - kinase inhibitor therapy is another type of targeted therapy. kinase inhibitors are drugs that block a protein needed for cancer cells to divide. they are being studied in the treatment of recurrent ewing sarcoma. - parp inhibitor therapy is another type of targeted therapy. parp inhibitors are drugs that block dna repair and may cause cancer cells to die. they are being studied in the treatment of recurrent ewing sarcoma. high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue is a way of giving high doses of chemotherapy to treat ewing sarcoma and then replacing blood -forming cells destroyed by cancer treatment. stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient and are frozen and stored. after chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion. these reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the body's blood cells. chemotherapy with stem cell rescue is used to treat recurrent ewing sarcoma. new types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. this summary section describes treatments that are being studied in clinical trials. it may not mention every new treatment being studied. information about clinical trials is available from the nci website. chimeric antigen receptor (car) t-cell therapy car t-cell therapy is a type of immunotherapy that changes the patient's t cells (a type of immune system cell) so they will attack certain proteins on the surface of cancer cells. t cells are taken from the patient and special receptors are added to their surface in the laboratory. the changed cells are called chimeric antigen receptor (car) t cells. the car t cells are grown in the laboratory and given to the patient by infusion. the car t cells multiply in the patient's blood and attack cancer cells. car t-cell therapy is being studied in the treatment of ewing sarcoma that has recurred. patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. for some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. there are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. see the treatment options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. these have been retrieved from nci's listing of clinical trials. follow-up tests may be needed. some of the tests that were done to diagnose the cancer or to find out the stage of the cancer may be repeated. some tests will be repeated in order to see how well the treatment is working. decisions about whether to continue, change, or stop treatment may be based on the results of these tests. some of the tests will continue to be done from time to time after treatment has ended. the results of these tests can show if your child's condition has changed or if the cancer has recurred (come back). these tests are sometimes called follow-up tests or check-ups. treatment options for ewing sarcoma localized ewing sarcoma standard treatments for localized ewing sarcoma include: - chemotherapy. - surgery and/or radiation therapy. these treatments and the order they are given depend on the following: - where in the body the tumor started. - how large the tumor is when the cancer is diagnosed. - whether the tumor was completely removed by surgery. - the child's age and general health. - whether the treatment will affect important body functions or the way the child will look. treatments being studied for localized ewing sarcoma include: - high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue. check the list of nci-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with localized ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. for more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. general information about clinical trials is available from the nci website. metastatic ewing sarcoma standard treatments for metastatic ewing sarcoma include: - chemotherapy. - surgery. - radiation therapy. these treatments and the order they are given depend on the following: - where in the body the tumor started. - where the tumor has spread. - how large the tumor is. - whether the treatment will affect important body functions or the way the child will look. - the child's age and general health. treatments being studied for metastatic ewing sarcoma include the following: - combination chemotherapy with or without targeted therapy. radiation therapy is given to areas of bone where cancer has spread. - high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue. check the list of nci-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with metastatic ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. for more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. general information about clinical trials is available from the nci website. recurrent ewing sarcoma there is no standard treatment for recurrent ewing sarcoma but treatment options may include the following: - combination chemotherapy. - radiation therapy to bone tumors, as palliative therapy to relieve symptoms and improve the quality of life. - radiation therapy that may be followed by surgery to remove tumors that have spread to the lungs. - high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue. - targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody. these treatments and the order they are given depend on the following: - where in the body the tumor came back. - the initial treatment given. treatment options being studied for recurrent ewing sarcoma include the following: - targeted therapy with a monoclonal antibody. - chimeric antigen receptor (car) t-cell therapy. - targeted therapy with a parp inhibitor and chemotherapy. check the list of nci-supported cancer clinical trials that are now accepting patients with recurrent ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. for more specific results, refine the search by using other search features, such as the location of the trial, the type of treatment, or the name of the drug. talk with your child's doctor about clinical trials that may be right for your child. general information about clinical trials is available from the nci website.<end>
<question>is ewing sarcoma inherited ?<answer>this condition is generally not inherited but arises from a mutation in the body's cells that occurs after conception. this alteration is called a somatic mutation.<end>
<question>who is at risk for gout? ?<answer>yes. a number of medications may put people at risk for developing hyperuricemia and gout. they include - diuretics, which are taken to eliminate excess fluid from the body in conditions like hypertension, edema, and heart disease, and which decrease the amount of uric acid passed in the urine. (high levels of uric acid in the blood can lead to gout.) - salicylate-containing drugs, such as aspirin - niacin, a vitamin also known as nicotinic acid - cyclosporine, a medication that suppresses the bodys immune system (the system that protects the body from infection and disease). this medication is used in the treatment of some autoimmune diseases and to prevent the bodys rejection of transplanted organs. - levodopa, a medicine used in the treatment of parkinsons disease. diuretics, which are taken to eliminate excess fluid from the body in conditions like hypertension, edema, and heart disease, and which decrease the amount of uric acid passed in the urine. (high levels of uric acid in the blood can lead to gout.) salicylate-containing drugs, such as aspirin niacin, a vitamin also known as nicotinic acid cyclosporine, a medication that suppresses the bodys immune system (the system that protects the body from infection and disease). this medication is used in the treatment of some autoimmune diseases and to prevent the bodys rejection of transplanted organs. levodopa, a medicine used in the treatment of parkinsons disease.<end>
<question>how to diagnose gout ?<answer>to confirm a diagnosis of gout, the doctor inserts a needle into the inflamed joint and draws a sample of synovial fluid, the substance that lubricates a joint. a laboratory technician places some of the fluid on a slide and looks for uric acid crystals under a microscope. if uric acid crystals are found in the fluid surrounding the joint, the person usually has gout.<end>
<question>what is (are) gout ?<answer>sudden, intense joint pain gout is a form of arthritis that causes the sudden onset of intense pain and swelling in the joints, which also may be warm and red. attacks frequently occur at night and can be triggered by stressful events, alcohol or drugs, or the presence of another illness. early attacks usually subside within 3 to 10 days, even without treatment, and the next attack may not occur for months or even years. where gout usually occurs sometime during the course of the disease, many patients will develop gout in the big toe. gout frequently affects joints in the lower part of the body such as the ankles, heels, knees, or toes. who is at risk? adult men, particularly those between the ages of 40 and 50, are more likely to develop gout than women, who rarely develop the disease before menstruation ends. a buildup of uric acid before an attack, needle-like crystals of uric acid build up in connective tissue, in the joint space between two bones, or in both. uric acid is a substance that results from the breakdown of purines, which are part of all human tissue and are found in many foods. normally, uric acid is dissolved in the blood and passed through the kidneys into the urine, where it is eliminated. if there is an increase in the production of uric acid or if the kidneys do not eliminate enough uric acid from the body, levels of it build up in the blood (a condition called hyperuricemia). hyperuricemia also may result when a person eats too many high-purine foods, such as liver, dried beans and peas, anchovies, and gravies. hyperuricemia is not a disease, and by itself it is not dangerous. however, if too many uric acid crystals form as a result of hyperuricemia, gout can develop. the crystals form and build up in the joint, causing inflammation. stages of gout gout can progress through four stages. asymptomatic (without symptoms) hyperuricemia. in this stage, a person has elevated levels of uric acid in the blood (hyperuricemia), but no other symptoms. treatment is usually not required. acute gout, or acute gouty arthritis. in this stage, hyperuricemia has caused uric acid crystals to build up in joint spaces. this leads to a sudden onset of intense pain and swelling in the joints, which also may be warm and very tender. an acute (sudden) attack commonly occurs at night and can be triggered by stressful events, alcohol or drugs, or the presence of another illness. attacks usually subside within 3 to 10 days, even without treatment, and the next attack may not occur for months or even years. over time, however, attacks can last longer and occur more frequently. interval or intercritical gout. this is the period between acute attacks. in this stage, a person does not have any symptoms. chronic tophaceous (toe fay shus) gout. this is the most disabling stage of gout. it usually develops over a long period, such as 10 years. in this stage, the disease may have caused permanent damage to the affected joints and sometimes to the kidneys. with proper treatment, most people with gout do not progress to this advanced stage.<end>
<question>what is (are) gout ?<answer>the national institute of arthritis and musculoskeletal and skin diseases (niams) at nih has more information about gout. check out the information here. also, see "key words" related to gout.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for tay-sachs disease ?<answer>the mission of the national institute of neurological disorders and stroke (ninds) is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. the ninds is a part of the national institutes of health (nih), the leading supporter of biomedical research in the world. the ninds and other nih institutes supports the lysosomal diseases netowrk, which addresses some of the major challenges in the diagnosis, management, and therapy of rare diseases, including the lipid storage diseases. additional research funded by the ninds focuses on better understanding how neurological defects arise in lipid storage disorders and on the development of new treatments targeting disease mechanisms, including gene therapies, cell-based therapies, and pharmacological approaches. ninds-funded research on the gangliosidoses includes using variations of magnetic resonance imaging to develop a biomarker (a sign that may indicate risk of a disease and improve diagnosis) to effectively evaluate brain biochemistry and disease progression. other research is expanding the use of virus-delivered gene therapy seen in an animall model of tay-sachs disease for use in humans.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by tay-sachs disease ?<answer>tay-sachs disease is very rare in the general population. the genetic mutations that cause this disease are more common in people of ashkenazi (eastern and central european) jewish heritage than in those with other backgrounds. the mutations responsible for this disease are also more common in certain french-canadian communities of quebec, the old order amish community in pennsylvania, and the cajun population of louisiana.<end>
<question>what is (are) tay-sachs disease ?<answer>tay-sachs disease is a rare, inherited disorder. it causes too much of a fatty substance to build up in the brain. this buildup destroys nerve cells, causing mental and physical problems. infants with tay-sachs disease appear to develop normally for the first few months of life. then mental and physical abilities decline. the child becomes blind, deaf, and unable to swallow. muscles begin to waste away and paralysis sets in. even with the best of care, children with tay-sachs disease usually die by age 4. the cause is a gene mutation which is most common in eastern european ashkenazi jews. to get the disease, both parents must have the gene. if they do, there is a 25% chance of the child having the disease. a blood test and prenatal tests can check for the gene or the disease. there is no cure. medicines and good nutrition can help some symptoms. some children need feeding tubes. nih: national institute of neurological disorders and stroke<end>
<question>is tay-sachs disease inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for tourette syndrome ?<answer>the national institute of neurological disorders and stroke (ninds) and other institutes of the national institutes of health (nih) conduct research in laboratories at the nih and support additional research through grants to major medical institutions across the country. knowledge about ts comes from studies across a number of medical and scientific disciplines, including genetics, neuroimaging, neuropathology, clinical trials, epidemiology, neurophysiology, neuroimmunology, and descriptive/diagnostic clinical science. findings from these studies will provide clues for more effective therapies.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by tourette syndrome ?<answer>although the exact incidence of tourette syndrome is uncertain, it is estimated to affect 1 to 10 in 1,000 children. this disorder occurs in populations and ethnic groups worldwide, and it is more common in males than in females.<end>
<question>what is (are) tourette syndrome ?<answer>if you have tourette syndrome, you make unusual movements or sounds, called tics. you have little or no control over them. common tics are throat-clearing and blinking. you may repeat words, spin, or, rarely, blurt out swear words. tourette syndrome is a disorder of the nervous system. it often occurs with other problems, such as - attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd) - obsessive-compulsive disorder (ocd) - anxiety - depression the cause of tourette syndrome is unknown. it is more common in boys than girls. the tics usually start in childhood and may be worst in the early teens. many people eventually outgrow them. no treatment is needed unless the tics interfere with everyday life. excitement or worry can make tics worse. calm, focused activities may make them better. medicines and talk therapy may also help. nih: national institute of neurological disorders and stroke<end>
<question>is tourette syndrome inherited ?<answer>the inheritance pattern of tourette syndrome is unclear. although the features of this condition can cluster in families, many genetic and environmental factors are likely to be involved. among family members of an affected person, it is difficult to predict who else may be at risk of developing the condition. tourette syndrome was previously thought to have an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which suggests that one mutated copy of a gene in each cell would be sufficient to cause the condition. several decades of research have shown that this is not the case. almost all cases of tourette syndrome probably result from a variety of genetic and environmental factors, not changes in a single gene.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of glaucoma ?<answer>at first, open-angle glaucoma has no symptoms. it causes no pain. vision seems normal. without treatment, people with glaucoma will slowly lose their peripheral, or side vision. they seem to be looking through a tunnel. over time, straight-ahead vision may decrease until no vision remains.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for glaucoma ?<answer>through studies in the laboratory and with patients, the national eye institute is seeking better ways to detect, treat, and prevent vision loss in people with glaucoma. for example, researchers have discovered genes that could help explain how glaucoma damages the eye. nei also is supporting studies to learn more about who is likely to get glaucoma, when to treat people who have increased eye pressure, and which treatment to use first.<end>
<question>what is (are) glaucoma ?<answer>glaucoma is a group of diseases that can damage the eye's optic nerve and result in vision loss and blindness. while glaucoma can strike anyone, the risk is much greater for people over 60. how glaucoma develops there are several different types of glaucoma. most of these involve the drainage system within the eye. at the front of the eye there is a small space called the anterior chamber. a clear fluid flows through this chamber and bathes and nourishes the nearby tissues. (watch the video to learn more about glaucoma. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) in glaucoma, for still unknown reasons, the fluid drains too slowly out of the eye. as the fluid builds up, the pressure inside the eye rises. unless this pressure is controlled, it may cause damage to the optic nerve and other parts of the eye and result in loss of vision. open-angle glaucoma the most common type of glaucoma is called open-angle glaucoma. in the normal eye, the clear fluid leaves the anterior chamber at the open angle where the cornea and iris meet. when fluid reaches the angle, it flows through a spongy meshwork, like a drain, and leaves the eye. sometimes, when the fluid reaches the angle, it passes too slowly through the meshwork drain, causing the pressure inside the eye to build. if the pressure damages the optic nerve, open-angle glaucoma -- and vision loss -- may result. there is no cure for glaucoma. vision lost from the disease cannot be restored. however, there are treatments that may save remaining vision. that is why early diagnosis is important. see this graphic for a quick overview of glaucoma, including how many people it affects, whos at risk, what to do if you have it, and how to learn more. see a glossary of glaucoma terms.<end>
<question>what is (are) glaucoma ?<answer>national eye institute national institutes of health 2020 vision place bethesda, md 20892-3655 301-496-5248 e-mail: 2020@nei.nih.gov www.nei.nih.gov the glaucoma foundation 80 maiden lane, suite 700 new york, ny 10038 212-285-0080 glaucoma research foundation 251 post street, suite 600 san francisco, ca 94108 1-800-826-6693<end>
<question>what are the treatments for prescription and illicit drug abuse ?<answer>depending on the substance(s) involved, treatment may include medications, behavioral treatments, or a combination. a doctor, substance abuse counselor, or other health professional can determine the right treatment for an individual. treatment helps people reduce the powerful effects of drugs on the body and brain. in doing so, treatment helps people improve their physical health and everyday functioning and regain control of their lives. once in treatment, older adults do just as well or better than younger adults.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for prescription and illicit drug abuse ?<answer>the first step in a substance treatment program is often detoxification (detox), the process of allowing the body to get rid of the substance. detoxification under medical supervision allows the symptoms of withdrawal to be treated, but is not addiction treatment in and of itself. (withdrawal is the sick, sometimes unbearable feeling that people have when trying to stop or cut down on a substance they have become addicted to or have been taking for a long time.)the type of withdrawal symptoms and how long they last vary with the substance abused. for example, withdrawal from certain stimulants may lead to fatigue, depression, and sleep problems. unsupervised withdrawal from barbiturates and benzodiazepines can be dangerous.<end>
<question>how to prevent prescription and illicit drug abuse ?<answer>many reasons for abuse drug abuse, whether prescription or illicit drugs, can have serious consequences, particularly for older adults. that is why prevention is key. however, there are many different reasons why people abuse drugs and become addicted to them. these reasons need to be taken into account when considering how to best prevent drug abuse. family members, friends, pharmacists, and health care providers can all be involved in preventing drug abuse among older adults. preventing medication abuse there are steps that you as a patient can take to prevent abuse of prescription medications and its consequences. - when visiting the doctor or pharmacist, bring along all prescription and over-the-counter medicines that you take -- or a list of the medicines and their dosages (how much you take and how often). your doctor can make sure your medicines are right for you and make changes if necessary. - always follow medication directions carefully. - only use the medication for its prescribed purpose. - do not crush or break pills. - if you are not sure how to take a medicine correctly, ask your doctor or pharmacist. he or she can tell you how to take a medication properly and about side effects to watch out for and interactions with other medications. - ask how the medication will affect driving and other daily activities. - do not use other people's prescription medications, and do not share yours. - talk with your doctor before increasing or decreasing the medication dosage. when visiting the doctor or pharmacist, bring along all prescription and over-the-counter medicines that you take -- or a list of the medicines and their dosages (how much you take and how often). your doctor can make sure your medicines are right for you and make changes if necessary. always follow medication directions carefully. only use the medication for its prescribed purpose. do not crush or break pills. if you are not sure how to take a medicine correctly, ask your doctor or pharmacist. he or she can tell you how to take a medication properly and about side effects to watch out for and interactions with other medications. ask how the medication will affect driving and other daily activities. do not use other people's prescription medications, and do not share yours. talk with your doctor before increasing or decreasing the medication dosage. - do not stop taking a medicine on your own. talk to your doctor if you are having side effects or other problems. - learn about the medicines possible interactions with alcohol and other prescription and over-the-counter medicines, and follow your doctors instructions to avoid these interactions. - answer honestly if a doctor or other health care professional asks you about other drug or alcohol use. without that information, your doctor may not be able to provide you with the best care. also, if you have a substance problem, he or she can help you find the right treatment to prevent more serious problems from developing, including addiction. do not stop taking a medicine on your own. talk to your doctor if you are having side effects or other problems. learn about the medicines possible interactions with alcohol and other prescription and over-the-counter medicines, and follow your doctors instructions to avoid these interactions. answer honestly if a doctor or other health care professional asks you about other drug or alcohol use. without that information, your doctor may not be able to provide you with the best care. also, if you have a substance problem, he or she can help you find the right treatment to prevent more serious problems from developing, including addiction. for tips on safe use of medicines for older adults, see taking medicines safely." preventing illicit drug use preventing illicit drug use in older adults requires first knowing what contributes to it. for people of all ages, an individuals biology (including their genetics) and the environment, as well as how the two act together, determine a persons vulnerability to drug abuse and addiction -- or can protect against it. for example, being exposed to drugs of abuse in youth, living in a community where drug use is prevalent, having untreated mental disorders, such as depression, or dealing with difficult transition periods such as retirement or loss of a spouse can all make an older adult more vulnerable to drug abuse. prevention requires various approaches prevention efforts must focus on gaining a better understanding of the factors that promote illicit drug use in older adults. prevention also includes finding ways to stop drug use before it worsens and leads to health problems, including addiction. family members can play an important role by being aware of an older relatives well-being and possible drug abuse, and stepping in to help at an early stage, if necessary. doctors should ask their older patients about potential drug abuse and make referrals as needed.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for prescription and illicit drug abuse ?<answer>behavioral treatment helps people change the way they think about the abused substance and teaches them how to handle or avoid situations that trigger strong drug cravings. behavioral therapies can make treatment medications more effective, help people stay in treatment longer, and prevent relapse. there are four main types of behavioral treatments. - cognitive behavioral therapy seeks to help people recognize, avoid, and cope with situations in which they are most likely to abuse substances. cognitive behavioral therapy seeks to help people recognize, avoid, and cope with situations in which they are most likely to abuse substances. - motivational incentives offer rewards or privileges for attending counseling sessions, taking treatment medications, and not abusing substances. motivational incentives offer rewards or privileges for attending counseling sessions, taking treatment medications, and not abusing substances. - motivational interviewing is typically conducted by a treatment counselor and occurs when a person first enters a drug treatment program. it aims to get people to recognize the need for treatment and to take an active role in their recovery. motivational interviewing is typically conducted by a treatment counselor and occurs when a person first enters a drug treatment program. it aims to get people to recognize the need for treatment and to take an active role in their recovery. - group therapy, preferably with ones own age group, helps people face their substance abuse and the harm it causes. it teaches skills for dealing with personal problems without abusing medications or drugs. group therapy, preferably with ones own age group, helps people face their substance abuse and the harm it causes. it teaches skills for dealing with personal problems without abusing medications or drugs.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of ulcerative colitis ?<answer>the most common signs and symptoms of ulcerative colitis are diarrhea with blood or pus and abdominal discomfort. other signs and symptoms include - an urgent need to have a bowel movement - feeling tired - nausea or loss of appetite - weight loss - fever - anemiaa condition in which the body has fewer red blood cells than normal less common symptoms include - joint pain or soreness - eye irritation - certain rashes the symptoms a person experiences can vary depending on the severity of the inflammation and where it occurs in the intestine. when symptoms first appear, - most people with ulcerative colitis have mild to moderate symptoms - about 10 percent of people can have severe symptoms, such as frequent, bloody bowel movements; fevers; and severe abdominal cramping1<end>
<question>what are the treatments for ulcerative colitis ?<answer>a health care provider treats ulcerative colitis with - medications - surgery which treatment a person needs depends on the severity of the disease and the symptoms. each person experiences ulcerative colitis differently, so health care providers adjust treatments to improve the person's symptoms and induce, or bring about, remission. medications while no medication cures ulcerative colitis, many can reduce symptoms. the goals of medication therapy are - inducing and maintaining remission - improving the person's quality of life many people with ulcerative colitis require medication therapy indefinitely, unless they have their colon and rectum surgically removed. health care providers will prescribe the medications that best treat a person's symptoms: - aminosalicylates - corticosteroids - immunomodulators - biologics, also called anti-tnf therapies - other medications depending on the location of the symptoms in the colon, health care providers may recommend a person take medications by - enema, which involves flushing liquid medication into the rectum using a special wash bottle. the medication directly treats inflammation of the large intestine. - rectal foama foamy substance the person puts into the rectum like an enema. the medication directly treats inflammation of the large intestine. - suppositorya solid medication the person inserts into the rectum to dissolve. the intestinal lining absorbs the medication. - mouth. - iv. aminosalicylates are medications that contain 5-aminosalicyclic acid (5-asa), which helps control inflammation. health care providers typically use aminosalicylates to treat people with mild or moderate symptoms or help people stay in remission. aminosalicylates can be prescribed as an oral medication or a topical medicationby enema or suppository. combination therapyoral and rectalis most effective, even in people with extensive ulcerative colitis.5 aminosalicylates are generally well tolerated. aminosalicylates include - balsalazide - mesalamine - olsalazine - sulfasalazinea combination of sulfapyridine and 5-asa some of the common side effects of aminosalicylates include - abdominal pain - diarrhea - headaches - nausea health care providers may order routine blood tests for kidney function, as aminosalicylates can cause a rare allergic reaction in the kidneys. corticosteroids, also known as steroids, help reduce the activity of the immune system and decrease inflammation. health care providers prescribe corticosteroids for people with more severe symptoms and people who do not respond to aminosalicylates. health care providers do not typically prescribe corticosteroids for long-term use. corticosteroids are effective in bringing on remission; however, studies have not shown that the medications help maintain long-term remission. corticosteroids include - budesonide - hydrocortisone - methylprednisone - prednisone side effects of corticosteroids include - acne - a higher chance of developing infections - bone mass loss - death of bone tissue - high blood glucose - high blood pressure - mood swings - weight gain people who take budesonide may have fewer side effects than with other steroids. immunomodulators reduce immune system activity, resulting in less inflammation in the colon. these medications can take several weeks to 3 months to start working. immunomodulators include - azathioprine - 6-mercaptopurine, or 6-mp health care providers prescribe these medications for people who do not respond to 5-asas. people taking these medications may have the following side effects: - abnormal liver tests - feeling tired - infection - low white blood cell count, which can lead to a higher chance of infection - nausea and vomiting - pancreatitis - slightly increased chance of lymphoma - slightly increased chance of nonmelanoma skin cancers health care providers routinely test blood counts and liver function of people taking immunomodulators. people taking these medications should also have yearly skin cancer exams. people should talk with their health care provider about the risks and benefits of immunomodulators. biologicsincluding adalimumab, golimumab, infliximab, and vedolizumabare medications that target a protein made by the immune system called tumor necrosis factor (tnf). these medications decrease inflammation in the large intestine by neutralizing tnf. anti-tnf therapies work quickly to bring on remission, especially in people who do not respond to other medications. infliximab and vedolizumab are given through an iv; adalimumab and golimumab are given by injection. health care providers will screen patients for tuberculosis and hepatitis b before starting treatment with anti-tnf medications. side effects of anti-tnf medications may include - a higher chance of developing infectionsespecially tuberculosis or fungal infection - skin cancermelanoma - psoriasis other medications to treat symptoms or complications may include - acetaminophen for mild pain. people with ulcerative colitis should avoid using ibuprofen, naproxen, and aspirin since these medications can make symptoms worse. - antibiotics to prevent or treat infections. - loperamide to help slow or stop diarrhea. in most cases, people only take this medication for short periods of time since it can increase the chance of developing megacolon. people should check with a health care provider before taking loperamide, because those with significantly active ulcerative colitis should not take this medication.6 - cyclosporinehealth care providers prescribe this medication only for people with severe ulcerative colitis because of the side effects. people should talk with their health care provider about the risks and benefits of cyclosporine. surgery some people will need surgery to treat their ulcerative colitis when they have - colon cancer - dysplasia, or precancerous cells in the colon - complications that are life threatening, such as megacolon or bleeding - no improvement in symptoms or condition despite treatment - continued dependency on steroids - side effects from medications that threaten their health removal of the entire colon, including the rectum, "cures" ulcerative colitis. a surgeon performs the procedure at a hospital. a surgeon can perform two different types of surgery to remove a patient's colon and treat ulcerative colitis: - proctocolectomy and ileostomy - proctocolectomy and ileoanal reservoir full recovery from both operations may take 4 to 6 weeks. proctocolectomy and ileostomy. a proctocolectomy is surgery to remove a patient's entire colon and rectum. an ileostomy is a stoma, or opening in the abdomen, that a surgeon creates from a part of the ileumthe last section of the small intestine. the surgeon brings the end of the ileum through an opening in the patient's abdomen and attaches it to the skin, creating an opening outside of the patient's body. the stoma most often is located in the lower part of the patient's abdomen, just below the beltline. a removable external collection pouch, called an ostomy pouch or ostomy appliance, connects to the stoma and collects intestinal contents outside the patient's body. intestinal contents pass through the stoma instead of passing through the anus. the stoma has no muscle, so it cannot control the flow of intestinal contents, and the flow occurs whenever peristalsis occurs. peristalsis is the movement of the organ walls that propels food and liquid through the gi tract. people who have this type of surgery will have the ileostomy for the rest of their lives. proctocolectomy and ileoanal reservoir. an ileoanal reservior is an internal pouch made from the patient's ileum. this surgery is a common alternative to an ileostomy and does not have a permanent stoma. ileoanal reservoir is also known as a j-pouch, a pelvic pouch, or an ileoanal pouch anastamosis. the ileoanal reservior connects the ileum to the anus. the surgeon preserves the outer muscles of the patient's rectum during the proctocolectomy. next, the surgeon creates the ileal pouch and attaches it to the end of the rectum. waste is stored in the pouch and passes through the anus. after surgery, bowel movements may be more frequent and watery than before the procedure. people may have fecal incontinencethe accidental passing of solid or liquid stool or mucus from the rectum. medications can be used to control pouch function. women may be infertile following the surgery. many people develop pouchitis in the ileoanal reservoir. pouchitis is an irritation or inflammation of the lining of the ileoanal reservoir. a health care provider treats pouchitis with antibiotics. rarely, pouchitis can become chronic and require long-term antibiotics or other medications. the surgeon will recommend one of the operations based on a person's symptoms, severity of disease, expectations, age, and lifestyle. before making a decision, the person should get as much information as possible by talking with - health care providers - enterostomal therapists, nurses who work with colon-surgery patients - people who have had one of the surgeries patient-advocacy organizations can provide information about support groups and other resources. more information is provided in the niddk health topic, ostomy surgery.<end>
<question>what is (are) ulcerative colitis ?<answer>ulcerative colitis (uc) is a disease that causes inflammation and sores, called ulcers, in the lining of the rectum and colon. it is one of a group of diseases called inflammatory bowel disease. uc can happen at any age, but it usually starts between the ages of 15 and 30. it tends to run in families. the most common symptoms are pain in the abdomen and blood or pus in diarrhea. other symptoms may include - anemia - severe tiredness - weight loss - loss of appetite - bleeding from the rectum - sores on the skin - joint pain - growth failure in children about half of people with uc have mild symptoms. doctors use blood tests, stool tests, colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy, and imaging tests to diagnose uc. several types of drugs can help control it. some people have long periods of remission, when they are free of symptoms. in severe cases, doctors must remove the colon. nih: national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases<end>
<question>what are the complications of ulcerative colitis ?<answer>complications of ulcerative colitis can include - rectal bleedingwhen ulcers in the intestinal lining open and bleed. rectal bleeding can cause anemia, which health care providers can treat with diet changes and iron supplements. people who have a large amount of bleeding in the intestine over a short period of time may require surgery to stop the bleeding. severe bleeding is a rare complication of ulcerative colitis. - dehydration and malabsorbtion, which occur when the large intestine is unable to absorb fluids and nutrients because of diarrhea and inflammation. some people may need iv fluids to replace lost nutrients and fluids. - changes in bones. some corticosteroid medications taken to treat ulcerative colitis symptoms can cause - osteoporosisthe loss of bone - osteopenialow bone density health care providers will monitor people for bone loss and can recommend calcium and vitamin d supplements and medications to help prevent or slow bone loss. - inflammation in other areas of the body. the immune system can trigger inflammation in the - joints - eyes - skin - liver health care providers can treat inflammation by adjusting medications or prescribing new medications. - megacolona serious complication that occurs when inflammation spreads to the deep tissue layers of the large intestine. the large intestine swells and stops working. megacolon can be a life-threatening complication and most often requires surgery. megacolon is a rare complication of ulcerative colitis. ulcerative colitis and colon cancer people with ulcerative colitis may be more likely to develop colon cancer when - ulcerative colitis affects the entire colon - a person has ulcerative colitis for at least 8 years - inflammation is ongoing - people also have primary sclerosing cholangitis, a condition that affects the liver - a person is male people who receive ongoing treatment and remain in remission may reduce their chances of developing colon cancer. people with ulcerative colitis should talk with their health care provider about how often they should get screened for colon cancer. screening can include colonoscopy with biopsies or a special dye spray called chromoendoscopy. health care providers may recommend colonoscopy every 1 to 3 years for people with ulcerative colitis who have - the disease in one-third or more or of their colon - had ulcerative colitis for 8 years such screening does not reduce a person's chances of developing colon cancer. instead, screening can help diagnose cancer early and improve chances for recovery. surgery to remove the entire colon eliminates the risk of colon cancer.<end>
<question>what is (are) medicare and continuing care ?<answer>here are questions to ask when considering a home health agency. - is the agency medicare-approved? - how long has the agency served the community? - does this agency provide the services my relative or friend needs? - how are emergencies handled? - is the staff on duty around the clock? - how much do services and supplies cost? - will agency staff be in regular contact with the doctor? is the agency medicare-approved? how long has the agency served the community? does this agency provide the services my relative or friend needs? how are emergencies handled? is the staff on duty around the clock? how much do services and supplies cost? will agency staff be in regular contact with the doctor? you can use medicare's "home health compare" tool to compare home health agencies in your area. visit http://www.medicare.gov. under "search tools," select "compare home health agencies in your area."<end>
<question>what to do for medicare and continuing care ?<answer>nursing home care can be very expensive. medicare generally doesn't cover nursing home care. there are many ways people can pay for nursing home care. for example, they can use their own money, they may be able to get help from their state, or they may use long-term care insurance. nursing home care isn't covered by many types of health insurance. most people who enter nursing homes begin by paying for their care out of their own pocket. as they use up their resources over a period of time, they may eventually become eligible for medicaid. medicaid is a state and federal program that will pay most nursing home costs for people with limited income and resources. eligibility varies by state. medicaid pays for care for about 7 out of every 10 nursing home residents. medicaid will pay for nursing home care only when provided in a medicaid-certified facility. for information about medicaid eligibility, call your state medical assistance (medicaid) office. if you have questions about medicaid, you can call your state medical assistance (medicaid) office for more information. visit http://www.medicare.gov on the web. (under "search tools," select "find helpful phone numbers and websites.") or, call 1-800-medicare (1-800-633-4227) to get the telephone number. tty users should call 1-877-486-2048.<end>
<question>what is (are) medicare and continuing care ?<answer>medicare is a federal health insurance program for people - age 65 and older - under age 65 with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for a certain amount of time (24 months in most cases) - of any age who have end-stage renal disease (esrd), which is permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or a transplant. age 65 and older under age 65 with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for a certain amount of time (24 months in most cases) of any age who have end-stage renal disease (esrd), which is permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or a transplant. medicare helps with the cost of health care, but it does not cover all medical expenses.<end>
<question>what is (are) medicare and continuing care ?<answer>hospice care is a special way of caring for people who are terminally ill (dying) and helping their families cope. hospice care includes treatment to relieve symptoms and keep the individual comfortable. the goal is to provide end-of-life care, not to cure the illness. medical care, nursing care, social services, drugs for the terminal and related conditions, durable medical equipment, and other types of items and services can be a part of hospice care.<end>
<question>what is (are) cushing's syndrome ?<answer>cushing's syndrome is a hormonal disorder caused by prolonged exposure of the body's tissues to high levels of the hormone cortisol. sometimes called hypercortisolism, cushing's syndrome is relatively rare and most commonly affects adults aged 20 to 50. people who are obese and have type 2 diabetes, along with poorly controlled blood glucose-also called blood sugar-and high blood pressure, have an increased risk of developing the disorder.<end>
<question>what causes cushing's syndrome ?<answer>cushing's syndrome occurs when the body's tissues are exposed to high levels of cortisol for too long. many people develop cushing's syndrome because they take glucocorticoids-steroid hormones that are chemically similar to naturally produced cortisolsuch as prednisone for asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and other inflammatory diseases. glucocorticoids are also used to suppress the immune system after transplantation to keep the body from rejecting the new organ or tissue. other people develop cushing's syndrome because their bodies produce too much cortisol. normally, the production of cortisol follows a precise chain of events. first, the hypothalamus, a part of the brain about the size of a small sugar cube, sends corticotropin-releasing hormone (crh) to the pituitary gland. crh causes the pituitary to secrete adrenocorticotropin hormone (acth), which stimulates the adrenal glands. when the adrenals, which are located just above the kidneys, receive the acth, they respond by releasing cortisol into the bloodstream. cortisol performs vital tasks in the body including - helping maintain blood pressure and cardiovascular function - reducing the immune system's inflammatory response - balancing the effects of insulin, which breaks down glucose for energy - regulating the metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats one of cortisol's most important jobs is to help the body respond to stress. for this reason, women in their last 3 months of pregnancy and highly trained athletes normally have high levels of the hormone. people suffering from depression, alcoholism, malnutrition, or panic disorders also have increased cortisol levels. when the amount of cortisol in the blood is adequate, the hypothalamus and pituitary release less crh and acth. this process ensures the amount of cortisol released by the adrenal glands is precisely balanced to meet the bodys daily needs. however, if something goes wrong with the adrenals or the regulating switches in the pituitary gland or hypothalamus, cortisol production can go awry. pituitary adenomas pituitary adenomas cause 70 percent of cushing's syndrome cases,1 excluding those caused by glucocorticoid use. these benign, or noncancerous, tumors of the pituitary gland secrete extra acth. most people with the disorder have a single adenoma. this form of the syndrome, known as cushing's disease, affects women five times more often than men. ectopic acth syndrome some benign or, more often, cancerous tumors that arise outside the pituitary can produce acth. this condition is known as ectopic acth syndrome. lung tumors cause more than half of these cases, and men are affected three times more often than women. the most common forms of acth-producing tumors are small cell lung cancer, which accounts for about 13 percent of all lung cancer cases,2 and carcinoid tumors-small, slow-growing tumors that arise from hormone-producing cells in various parts of the body. other less common types of tumors that can produce acth are thymomas, pancreatic islet cell tumors, and medullary carcinomas of the thyroid. adrenal tumors in rare cases, an abnormality of the adrenal glands, most often an adrenal tumor, causes cushing's syndrome. adrenal tumors are four to five times more common in women than men, and the average age of onset is about 40. most of these cases involve noncancerous tumors of adrenal tissue called adrenal adenomas, which release excess cortisol into the blood. adrenocortical carcinomas-adrenal cancers-are the least common cause of cushing's syndrome. with adrenocortical carcinomas, cancer cells secrete excess levels of several adrenocortical hormones, including cortisol and adrenal androgens, a type of male hormone. adrenocortical carcinomas usually cause very high hormone levels and rapid development of symptoms. familial cushing's syndrome most cases of cushing's syndrome are not inherited. rarely, however, cushing's syndrome results from an inherited tendency to develop tumors of one or more endocrine glands. endocrine glands release hormones into the bloodstream. with primary pigmented micronodular adrenal disease, children or young adults develop small cortisol-producing tumors of the adrenal glands. with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (men1), hormone-secreting tumors of the parathyroid glands, pancreas, and pituitary develop; cushing's syndrome in men1 may be due to pituitary, ectopic, or adrenal tumors.<end>
<question>what is (are) cushing's syndrome ?<answer>cushing's syndrome is a hormonal disorder. the cause is long-term exposure to too much cortisol, a hormone that your adrenal gland makes. sometimes, taking synthetic hormone medicine to treat an inflammatory disease leads to cushing's. some kinds of tumors produce a hormone that can cause your body to make too much cortisol. cushing's syndrome is rare. some symptoms are - upper body obesity - thin arms and legs - severe fatigue and muscle weakness - high blood pressure - high blood sugar - easy bruising lab tests can show if you have it and find the cause. your treatment will depend on why you have too much cortisol. if it is because you have been taking synthetic hormones, a lower dose may control your symptoms. if the cause is a tumor, surgery and other therapies may be needed. nih: national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases<end>
<question>what are the treatments for cushing's syndrome ?<answer>treatment depends on the specific reason for excess cortisol and may include surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or the use of cortisol-inhibiting drugs. if the cause is long-term use of glucocorticoid hormones to treat another disorder, the doctor will gradually reduce the dosage to the lowest dose adequate for control of that disorder. once control is established, the daily dose of glucocorticoid hormones may be doubled and given on alternate days to lessen side effects. in some cases, noncorticosteroid drugs can be prescribed. pituitary adenomas several therapies are available to treat the acth-secreting pituitary adenomas of cushing's disease. the most widely used treatment is surgical removal of the tumor, known as transsphenoidal adenomectomy. using a special microscope and fine instruments, the surgeon approaches the pituitary gland through a nostril or an opening made below the upper lip. because this procedure is extremely delicate, patients are often referred to centers specializing in this type of surgery. the success, or cure, rate of this procedure is more than 80 percent when performed by a surgeon with extensive experience. if surgery fails or only produces a temporary cure, surgery can be repeated, often with good results. after curative pituitary surgery, the production of acth drops two levels below normal. this drop is natural and temporary, and patients are given a synthetic form of cortisol such as hydrocortisone or prednisone to compensate. most people can stop this replacement therapy in less than 1 or 2 years, but some must be on it for life. if transsphenoidal surgery fails or a patient is not a suitable candidate for surgery, radiation therapy is another possible treatment. radiation to the pituitary gland is given over a 6-week period, with improvement occurring in 40 to 50 percent of adults and up to 85 percent of children. another technique, called stereotactic radiosurgery or gamma knife radiation, can be given in a single high-dose treatment. it may take several months or years before people feel better from radiation treatment alone. combining radiation with cortisol-inhibiting drugs can help speed recovery. drugs used alone or in combination to control the production of excess cortisol are ketoconazole, mitotane, aminoglutethimide, and metyrapone. each drug has its own side effects that doctors consider when prescribing medical therapy for individual patients. ectopic acth syndrome to cure the overproduction of cortisol caused by ectopic acth syndrome, all of the cancerous tissue that is secreting acth must be eliminated. the choice of cancer treatment-surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or a combination of these treatmentsdepends on the type of cancer and how far it has spread. because acth-secreting tumors may be small or widespread at the time of diagnosis, making them difficult to locate and treat directly, cortisol-inhibiting drugs are an important part of treatment. in some cases, if other treatments fail, surgical removal of the adrenal glands, called bilateral adrenalectomy, may replace drug therapy. adrenal tumors surgery is the mainstay of treatment for benign and cancerous tumors of the adrenal glands. primary pigmented micronodular adrenal disease and the inherited carney complex-primary tumors of the heart that can lead to endocrine overactivity and cushing's syndrome-require surgical removal of the adrenal glands.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for marfan syndrome ?<answer>marfan syndrome has no cure. however, treatments can help delay or prevent complications, especially when started early. marfan syndrome can affect many parts of your body, including your heart, bones and joints, eyes, nervous system, and lungs. the type of treatment you receive will depend on your signs and symptoms. heart treatments aortic dilation, or aortic aneurysm, is the most common and serious heart problem linked to marfan syndrome. in this condition, the aortathe main artery that carries oxygen-rich blood to your bodystretches and grows weak. medicines are used to try to slow the rate of aortic dilation. surgery is used to replace the dilated segment of aorta before it tears. if you have marfan syndrome, you'll need routine care and tests to check your heart valves and aorta. medicines beta blockers are medicines that help your heart beat slower and with less force. these medicines may help relieve strain on your aorta and slow the rate of aortic dilation. some people have side effects from beta blockers, such as tiredness and nausea (feeling sick to your stomach). if side effects occur, your doctor may prescribe a calcium channel blocker or ace inhibitor instead of a beta blocker. both medicines help relieve stress on the aorta. studies suggest that blocking a protein called tgf-beta may help prevent some of the effects of marfan syndrome. research shows that the medicine losartan may block the protein in other conditions. the national heart, lung, and blood institute currently is sponsoring a study comparing losartan to a beta blocker in children and adults who have marfan syndrome. the study's goal is to find out which medicine, if either, is best at slowing the rate of aortic dilation. surgery if your aorta stretches, it's more likely to tear (a condition called aortic dissection). to prevent this, your doctor may recommend surgery to repair or replace part of your aorta. surgery may involve: a composite valve graft. for this surgery, part of the aorta and the aortic valve are removed. the aorta is replaced with a man-made tube called a graft. a man-made valve replaces the original valve. aortic valve-sparing surgery. if your aortic valve is working well, your doctor may recommend valve-sparing surgery. for this surgery, your doctor replaces the enlarged part of your aorta with a graft. your aortic valve is left in place. after aortic surgery, you may need medicines or followup tests. for example, after a composite valve graft, your doctor will prescribe medicines called anticoagulants, or "blood thinners." blood thinners help prevent blood clots from forming on your man-made aortic valve. you'll need to take these medicines for the rest of your life. if you've had valve-sparing surgery, you'll only need to take blood thinners for a short time, as your doctor prescribes. if you've had a composite valve graft, you're at increased risk for endocarditis (en-do-kar-di-tis). this is an infection of the inner lining of your heart chambers and valves. your doctor may recommend that you take antibiotics before certain medical or dental procedures that increase your risk of endocarditis. your doctor also may advise you to continue taking beta blockers or other medicines after either type of aortic surgery. after surgery, you may have routine cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (mri) or cardiac computed tomography (ct) scans to check your aorta. cardiac mri is a painless test that uses radio waves and magnets to created detailed pictures of your organs and tissues. cardiac ct is a painless test that uses an x-ray machine to take clear, detailed pictures of your heart. bone and joint treatments if you have scoliosis (a curved spine), your doctor may suggest a brace or other device to prevent the condition from getting worse. severe cases of scoliosis may require surgery. some people who have marfan syndrome need surgery to repair a chest that sinks in or sticks out. this surgery is done to prevent the chest from pressing on the lungs and heart. eye treatments marfan syndrome can lead to many eye problems, such as a dislocated lens, nearsightedness, early glaucoma (high pressure in the fluid in the eyes), and cataracts (clouding of an eye's lens). glasses or contact lenses can help with some of these problems. sometimes surgery is needed. nervous system treatments marfan syndrome can lead to dural ectasia. in this condition, a substance called the dura (which covers the fluid around your brain and spinal cord) stretches and grows weak. this can cause the bones of the spine to wear away. dural ectasia usually is treated with pain medicines. lung treatments marfan syndrome may cause pneumothorax, or collapsed lung. in this condition, air or gas builds up in the space between the lungs and the chest wall. if the condition is minor, it may go away on its own. however, you may need to have a tube placed through your skin and chest wall to remove the air. sometimes surgery is needed.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by marfan syndrome ?<answer>the incidence of marfan syndrome is approximately 1 in 5,000 worldwide.<end>
<question>what is (are) marfan syndrome ?<answer>marfan syndrome is a disorder that affects connective tissue. connective tissues are proteins that support skin, bones, blood vessels, and other organs. one of these proteins is fibrillin. a problem with the fibrillin gene causes marfan syndrome. marfan syndrome can be mild to severe, and the symptoms can vary. people with marfan syndrome are often very tall, thin, and loose jointed. most people with marfan syndrome have heart and blood vessel problems, such as a weakness in the aorta or heart valves that leak. they may also have problems with their bones, eyes, skin, nervous system, and lungs. there is no single test to diagnose marfan syndrome. your doctor may use your medical history, family history, and a physical exam to diagnose it. marfan syndrome has no cure, but treatments can help delay or prevent complications. treatments include medicines, surgery, and other therapies. nih: national institute of arthritis and musculoskeletal and skin diseases<end>
<question>is marfan syndrome inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. at least 25 percent of marfan syndrome cases result from a new mutation in the fbn1 gene. these cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis ?<answer>the most common symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis are - fatigue - joint pain - nausea - loss of appetite - pain or discomfort over the liver - skin rashes - dark yellow urine - light-colored stools - jaundice, or yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis range from mild to severe. some people may feel as if they have a mild case of the flu. others may have no symptoms when a health care provider diagnoses the disease; however, they can develop symptoms later.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for autoimmune hepatitis ?<answer>treatment for autoimmune hepatitis includes medication to suppress, or slow down, an overactive immune system. treatment may also include a liver transplant. treatment works best when autoimmune hepatitis is diagnosed early. people with autoimmune hepatitis generally respond to standard treatment and the disease can be controlled in most cases. long-term response to treatment can stop the disease from getting worse and may even reverse some damage to the liver. medications people with autoimmune hepatitis who have no symptoms or a mild form of the disease may or may not need to take medication. a health care provider will determine if a person needs treatment. in some people with mild autoimmune hepatitis, the disease may go into remission. remission is a period when a person is symptom-free and blood tests and liver biopsy show improvement in liver function. corticosteroids. corticosteroids are medications that decrease swelling and reduce the activity of the immune system. health care providers treat both types of autoimmune hepatitis with a daily dose of a corticosteroid called prednisone. treatment may begin with a high dose that is gradually lowered as the disease is controlled. the treatment goal is to find the lowest possible dose that helps control the disease. side effects of prednisone may include - weight gain - weakness of the bones, called osteoporosis or osteomalacia - thinning of the hair and skin - acne - diabetes - high blood pressure - cataracts, a clouding in the lens of the eyes - glaucoma, elevated pressure in the eyes - anxiety and confusion a health care provider will closely monitor and manage any side effects that may occur, as high doses of prednisone are often prescribed to treat autoimmune hepatitis. immune system suppressors. medications that suppress the immune system prevent the body from making autoantibodies and block the immune reaction that contributes to inflammation. in most cases, health care providers use azathioprine (azasan, imuran) in conjunction with prednisone to treat autoimmune hepatitis. when using azathioprine, a health care provider can use a lower dose of prednisone, which may reduce prednisone's side effects. side effects of azathioprine include - low white blood cell count - nausea - vomiting - skin rash - liver damage - pancreatitis, or inflammation of the pancreas azathioprine is an immune system suppressor, so people taking the medication should undergo routine blood tests to monitor their white blood cell counts. a low white blood cell count can lead to bone marrow failure. bone marrow is the tissue found inside bones that produces new blood cells, including platelets. a health care provider will also check the platelet count when blood tests are done. a person may need to discontinue prednisone or azathioprine if they cause severe side effects. the risk of side effects is higher in people who also have cirrhosis. a health care provider may gradually reduce the dose of medication in people who show improvement, although the symptoms can return. when a person discontinues treatment, a health care provider will perform routine blood tests and carefully monitor the person's condition for a return of symptoms. treatment with low doses of prednisone or azathioprine may be necessary on and off for many years. people who do not respond to standard immune therapy or who have severe side effects from the medications may benefit from other immunosuppressive agents such as mycophenolate mofetil (cellcept), cyclosporine, or tacrolimus (hecoria, prograf). medications that suppress the immune system may lead to various forms of cancer. people on low doses of azathioprine for long periods of time are at slight risk of developing cancer. liver transplant in some people, autoimmune hepatitis progresses to cirrhosis and end-stage liver failure, and a liver transplant may be necessary. symptoms of cirrhosis and liver failure include the symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis and - generalized itching - a longer-than-usual amount of time for bleeding to stop - easy bruising - a swollen stomach or swollen ankles - spiderlike blood vessels, called spider angiomas, that develop on the skin - abdominal bloating due to an enlarged liver - fluid in the abdomenalso called ascites - forgetfulness or confusion liver transplant is surgery to remove a diseased or an injured liver and replace it with a healthy one from another person, called a donor. a team of surgeons performs a liver transplant in a hospital. when possible, the patient fasts for 8 hours before the surgery. the patient stays in the hospital about 1 to 2 weeks to be sure the transplanted liver is functioning properly. the health care provider will monitor the patient for bleeding, infections, and signs of liver rejection. the patient will take prescription medications long term to prevent infections and rejection. liver transplant surgery for autoimmune hepatitis is successful in most cases. more information is provided in the niddk health topic, liver transplantation.<end>
<question>what is (are) autoimmune hepatitis ?<answer>autoimmune hepatitis is a disease in which the bodys immune system attacks liver cells. this immune response causes inflammation of the liver, also called hepatitis. the disease can be quite serious and, if not treated, gets worse over time, leading to cirrhosis of the liver and/or liver failure. autoimmune hepatitis sometimes occurs in relatives of people with autoimmune diseases, suggesting a genetic cause. this disease is most common in young girls and women.<end>
<question>what to do for autoimmune hepatitis ?<answer>researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing autoimmune hepatitis.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of lactose intolerance ?<answer>common symptoms of lactose intolerance include - abdominal bloating, a feeling of fullness or swelling in the abdomen - abdominal pain - diarrhea - gas - nausea symptoms occur 30 minutes to 2 hours after consuming milk or milk products. symptoms range from mild to severe based on the amount of lactose the person ate or drank and the amount a person can tolerate.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for lactose intolerance ?<answer>many people can manage the symptoms of lactose intolerance by changing their diet. some people may only need to limit the amount of lactose they eat or drink. others may need to avoid lactose altogether. using lactase products can help some people manage their symptoms. for people with secondary lactase deficiency, treating the underlying cause improves lactose tolerance. in infants with developmental lactase deficiency, the ability to digest lactose improves as the infants mature. people with primary and congenital lactase deficiency cannot change their bodys ability to produce lactase.<end>
<question>what is (are) lactose intolerance ?<answer>lactose intolerance means that you cannot digest foods with lactose in them. lactose is the sugar found in milk and foods made with milk. after eating foods with lactose in them, you may feel sick to your stomach. you may also have - gas - diarrhea - swelling in your stomach your doctor may do a blood, breath or stool test to find out if your problems are due to lactose intolerance. lactose intolerance is not serious. eating less food with lactose, or using pills or drops to help you digest lactose usually helps. you may need to take a calcium supplement if you don't get enough of it from your diet, since milk and foods made with milk are the most common source of calcium for most people. nih: national institute of diabetes and digestive and kidney diseases<end>
<question>what to do for lactose intolerance ?<answer>people may find it helpful to talk with a health care provider or a registered dietitian about a dietary plan. a dietary plan can help people manage the symptoms of lactose intolerance and make sure they get enough nutrients. parents, caretakers, childcare providers, and others who serve food to children with lactose intolerance should follow the dietary plan recommended by the childs health care provider or registered dietitian. milk and milk products. gradually introducing small amounts of milk or milk products may help some people adapt to them with fewer symptoms. often, people can better tolerate milk or milk products by having them with meals, such as having milk with cereal or having cheese with crackers. people with lactose intolerance are generally more likely to tolerate hard cheeses, such as cheddar or swiss, than a glass of milk. a 1.5ounce serving of low-fat hard cheese has less than 1 gram of lactose, while a 1-cup serving of low-fat milk has about 11 to 13 grams of lactose.2 however, people with lactose intolerance are also more likely to tolerate yogurt than milk, even though yogurt and milk have similar amounts of lactose.2 lactose-free and lactose-reduced milk and milk products. lactose-free and lactose-reduced milk and milk products are available at most supermarkets and are identical nutritionally to regular milk and milk products. manufacturers treat lactose-free milk with the lactase enzyme. this enzyme breaks down the lactose in the milk. lactose-free milk remains fresh for about the same length of time or, if it is ultra-pasteurized, longer than regular milk. lactose-free milk may have a slightly sweeter taste than regular milk. lactase products. people can use lactase tablets and drops when they eat or drink milk products. the lactase enzyme digests the lactose in the food and therefore reduces the chances of developing digestive symptoms. people should check with a health care provider before using these products because some groups, such as young children and pregnant and breastfeeding women, may not be able to use them.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for short bowel syndrome ?<answer>a health care provider will recommend treatment for short bowel syndrome based on a patient's nutritional needs. treatment may include - nutritional support - medications - surgery - intestinal transplant nutritional support the main treatment for short bowel syndrome is nutritional support, which may include the following: - oral rehydration. adults should drink water, sports drinks, sodas without caffeine, and salty broths. children should drink oral rehydration solutionsspecial drinks that contain salts and minerals to prevent dehydrationsuch as pedialyte, naturalyte, infalyte, and ceralyte, which are sold in most grocery stores and drugstores. - parenteral nutrition. this treatment delivers fluids, electrolytes, and liquid vitamins and minerals into the bloodstream through an intravenous (iv) tubea tube placed into a vein. health care providers give parenteral nutrition to people who cannot or should not get their nutrition or enough fluids through eating. - enteral nutrition. this treatment delivers liquid food to the stomach or small intestine through a feeding tubea small, soft, plastic tube placed through the nose or mouth into the stomach. gallstonessmall, pebblelike substances that develop in the gallbladderare a complication of enteral nutrition. more information is provided in the niddk health topic, gallstones. - vitamin and mineral supplements. a person may need to take vitamin and mineral supplements during or after parenteral or enteral nutrition. - special diet. a health care provider can recommend a specific diet plan for the patient that may include - small, frequent feedings - avoiding foods that can cause diarrhea, such as foods high in sugar, protein, and fiber - avoiding high-fat foods medications a health care provider may prescribe medications to treat short bowel syndrome, including - antibiotics to prevent bacterial overgrowth - h2 blockers to treat too much gastric acid secretion - proton pump inhibitors to treat too much gastric acid secretion - choleretic agents to improve bile flow and prevent liver disease - bile-salt binders to decrease diarrhea - anti-secretin agents to reduce gastric acid in the intestine - hypomotility agents to increase the time it takes food to travel through the intestines, leading to increased nutrient absorption - growth hormones to improve intestinal absorption - teduglutide to improve intestinal absorption surgery the goal of surgery is to increase the small intestine's ability to absorb nutrients. approximately half of the patients with short bowel syndrome need surgery.2 surgery used to treat short bowel syndrome includes procedures that - prevent blockage and preserve the length of the small intestine - narrow any dilated segment of the small intestine - slow the time it takes for food to travel through the small intestine - lengthen the small intestine long-term treatment and recovery, which for some may take years, depend in part on - what sections of the small intestine were removed - how much of the intestine is damaged - how well the muscles of the intestine work - how well the remaining small intestine adapts over time intestinal transplant an intestinal transplant is surgery to remove a diseased or an injured small intestine and replace it with a healthy small intestine from a person who has just died, called a donor. sometimes a living donor can provide a segment of his or her small intestine. transplant surgeonsdoctors who specialize in performing transplant surgeryperform the surgery on patients for whom other treatments have failed and who have lifethreatening complications from long-term parenteral nutrition. an intestinal-transplant team performs the surgery in a hospital. the patient will need anesthesia. complications of intestinal transplantation include infections and rejection of the transplanted organ. a successful intestinal transplant can be a life-saving treatment for people with intestinal failure caused by short bowel syndrome. by 2008, transplant surgeons had performed almost 2,000 intestinal transplantations in the united statesapproximately 75 percent of which were in patients younger than 18 years of age.3 a health care provider will tailor treatment to the severity of the patient's disease: - treatment for mild short bowel syndrome involves eating small, frequent meals; drinking fluid; taking nutritional supplements; and using medications to treat diarrhea. - treatment for moderate short bowel syndrome is similar to that for mild short bowel syndrome, with the addition of parenteral nutrition as needed. - treatment for severe short bowel syndrome involves use of parenteral nutrition and oral rehydration solutions. patients may receive enteral nutrition or continue normal eating, even though most of the nutrients are not absorbed. both enteral nutrition and normal eating stimulate the remaining intestine to work better and may allow patients to discontinue parenteral nutrition. some patients with severe short bowel syndrome require parenteral nutrition indefinitely or surgery.<end>
<question>what is (are) short bowel syndrome ?<answer>intestinal adaptation is a process that usually occurs in children after removal of a large portion of their small intestine. the remaining small intestine goes through a period of adaptation and grows to increase its ability to absorb nutrients. intestinal adaptation can take up to 2 years to occur, and during this time a person may be heavily dependent on parenteral or enteral nutrition.1<end>
<question>what is (are) short bowel syndrome ?<answer>short bowel syndrome is a group of problems related to poor absorption of nutrients. short bowel syndrome typically occurs in people who have - had at least half of their small intestine removed and sometimes all or part of their large intestine removed - significant damage of the small intestine - poor motility, or movement, inside the intestines short bowel syndrome may be mild, moderate, or severe, depending on how well the small intestine is working. people with short bowel syndrome cannot absorb enough water, vitamins, minerals, protein, fat, calories, and other nutrients from food. what nutrients the small intestine has trouble absorbing depends on which section of the small intestine has been damaged or removed.<end>
<question>what to do for short bowel syndrome ?<answer>researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing short bowel syndrome.<end>
<question>what is (are) rett syndrome ?<answer>rett syndrome is a brain disorder that occurs almost exclusively in girls. the most common form of the condition is known as classic rett syndrome. after birth, girls with classic rett syndrome have 6 to 18 months of apparently normal development before developing severe problems with language and communication, learning, coordination, and other brain functions. early in childhood, affected girls lose purposeful use of their hands and begin making repeated hand wringing, washing, or clapping motions. they tend to grow more slowly than other children and have a small head size (microcephaly). other signs and symptoms that can develop include breathing abnormalities, seizures, an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), and sleep disturbances. researchers have described several variant or atypical forms of rett syndrome, which can be milder or more severe than the classic form.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to rett syndrome ?<answer>classic rett syndrome and some variant forms of the condition are caused by mutations in the mecp2 gene. this gene provides instructions for making a protein (mecp2) that is critical for normal brain function. although the exact function of the mecp2 protein is unclear, it is likely involved in maintaining connections (synapses) between nerve cells (neurons). it may also be necessary for the normal function of other types of brain cells. the mecp2 protein is thought to help regulate the activity of genes in the brain. this protein may also control the production of different versions of certain proteins in brain cells. mutations in the mecp2 gene alter the mecp2 protein or result in the production of less protein, which appears to disrupt the normal function of neurons and other cells in the brain. specifically, studies suggest that changes in the mecp2 protein may reduce the activity of certain neurons and impair their ability to communicate with one another. it is unclear how these changes lead to the specific features of rett syndrome. several conditions with signs and symptoms overlapping those of rett syndrome have been found to result from mutations in other genes. these conditions, including foxg1 syndrome, were previously thought to be variant forms of rett syndrome. however, doctors and researchers have identified some important differences between the conditions, so they are now usually considered to be separate disorders.<end>
<question>what is (are) rett syndrome ?<answer>rett syndrome is a rare genetic disease that causes developmental and nervous system problems, mostly in girls. it's related to autism spectrum disorder. babies with rett syndrome seem to grow and develop normally at first. between 3 months and 3 years of age, though, they stop developing and even lose some skills. symptoms include - loss of speech - loss of hand movements such as grasping - compulsive movements such as hand wringing - balance problems - breathing problems - behavior problems - learning problems or intellectual disability rett syndrome has no cure. you can treat some of the symptoms with medicines, surgery, and physical and speech therapy. most people with rett syndrome live into middle age and beyond. they will usually need care throughout their lives. nih: national institute of child health and human development<end>
<question>is rett syndrome inherited ?<answer>in more than 99 percent of people with rett syndrome, there is no history of the disorder in their family. many of these cases result from new mutations in the mecp2 gene. a few families with more than one affected family member have been described. these cases helped researchers determine that classic rett syndrome and variants caused by mecp2 gene mutations have an x-linked dominant pattern of inheritance. a condition is considered x-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the x chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. the inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. males with mutations in the mecp2 gene often die in infancy. however, a small number of males with a genetic change involving mecp2 have developed signs and symptoms similar to those of rett syndrome, including intellectual disability, seizures, and movement problems. in males, this condition is described as mecp2-related severe neonatal encephalopathy.<end>
<question>what is (are) multiple sclerosis ?<answer>multiple sclerosis is a condition characterized by areas of damage (lesions) on the brain and spinal cord. these lesions are associated with destruction of the covering that protects nerves and promotes the efficient transmission of nerve impulses (the myelin sheath) and damage to nerve cells. multiple sclerosis is considered an autoimmune disorder; autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's own tissues and organs, in this case tissues of the nervous system. multiple sclerosis usually begins in early adulthood, between ages 20 and 40. the symptoms vary widely, and affected individuals can experience one or more effects of nervous system damage. multiple sclerosis often causes sensory disturbances in the limbs, including a prickling or tingling sensation (paresthesia), numbness, pain, and itching. some people experience lhermitte sign, which is an electrical shock-like sensation that runs down the back and into the limbs. this sensation usually occurs when the head is bent forward. problems with muscle control are common in people with multiple sclerosis. affected individuals may have tremors, muscle stiffness (spasticity), exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), weakness or partial paralysis of the muscles of the limbs, difficulty walking, or poor bladder control. multiple sclerosis is also associated with vision problems, such as blurred or double vision or partial or complete vision loss. infections that cause fever can make the symptoms worse. there are several forms of multiple sclerosis: relapsing-remitting ms, secondary progressive ms, primary progressive ms, and progressive relapsing ms. the most common is the relapsing-remitting form, which affects approximately 80 percent of people with multiple sclerosis. individuals with this form of the condition have periods during which they experience symptoms, called clinical attacks, followed by periods without any symptoms (remission). the triggers of clinical attacks and remissions are unknown. after about 10 years, relapsing-remitting ms usually develops into another form of the disorder called secondary progressive ms. in this form, there are no remissions, and symptoms of the condition continually worsen. primary progressive ms is the next most common form, affecting approximately 10 to 20 percent of people with multiple sclerosis. this form is characterized by constant symptoms that worsen over time, with no clinical attacks or remissions. primary progressive ms typically begins later than the other forms, around age 40. progressive relapsing ms is a rare form of multiple sclerosis that initially appears like primary progressive ms, with constant symptoms. however, people with progressive relapsing ms also experience clinical attacks of more severe symptoms.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to multiple sclerosis ?<answer>although the cause of multiple sclerosis is unknown, variations in dozens of genes are thought to be involved in multiple sclerosis risk. changes in the hla-drb1 gene are the strongest genetic risk factors for developing multiple sclerosis. other factors associated with an increased risk of developing multiple sclerosis include changes in the il7r gene and environmental factors, such as exposure to the epstein-barr virus, low levels of vitamin d, and smoking. the hla-drb1 gene belongs to a family of genes called the human leukocyte antigen (hla) complex. the hla complex helps the immune system distinguish the body's own proteins from proteins made by foreign invaders (such as viruses and bacteria). each hla gene has many different normal variations, allowing each person's immune system to react to a wide range of foreign proteins. variations in several hla genes have been associated with increased multiple sclerosis risk, but one particular variant of the hla-drb1 gene, called hla-drb1*15:01, is the most strongly linked genetic factor. the il7r gene provides instructions for making one piece of two different receptor proteins: the interleukin 7 (il-7) receptor and the thymic stromal lymphopoietin (tslp) receptor. both receptors are embedded in the cell membrane of immune cells. these receptors stimulate signaling pathways that induce the growth and division (proliferation) and survival of immune cells. the genetic variation involved in multiple sclerosis leads to production of an il-7 receptor that is not embedded in the cell membrane but is instead found inside the cell. it is unknown if this variation affects the tslp receptor. because the hla-drb1 and il-7r genes are involved in the immune system, changes in either might be related to the autoimmune response that damages the myelin sheath and nerve cells and leads to the signs and symptoms of multiple sclerosis. however, it is unclear exactly what role variations in either gene plays in development of the condition.<end>
<question>what is (are) multiple sclerosis ?<answer>multiple sclerosis (ms) is a nervous system disease that affects your brain and spinal cord. it damages the myelin sheath, the material that surrounds and protects your nerve cells. this damage slows down or blocks messages between your brain and your body, leading to the symptoms of ms. they can include - visual disturbances - muscle weakness - trouble with coordination and balance - sensations such as numbness, prickling, or "pins and needles" - thinking and memory problems no one knows what causes ms. it may be an autoimmune disease, which happens when your immune system attacks healthy cells in your body by mistake. multiple sclerosis affects women more than men. it often begins between the ages of 20 and 40. usually, the disease is mild, but some people lose the ability to write, speak, or walk. there is no single test for ms. doctors use a medical history, physical exam, neurological exam, mri, and other tests to diagnose it. there is no cure for ms, but medicines may slow it down and help control symptoms. physical and occupational therapy may also help. nih: national institute of neurological disorders and stroke<end>
<question>is multiple sclerosis inherited ?<answer>the inheritance pattern of multiple sclerosis is unknown, although the condition does appear to be passed down through generations in families. the risk of developing multiple sclerosis is higher for siblings or children of a person with the condition than for the general population.<end>
<question>what causes problems with taste ?<answer>yes. certain medicines can cause a change in our ability to taste. the medicines that most frequently do this are certain antibiotics and some antihistamines, although other medications can affect our sense of taste as well. if your medicine is causing a problem with your sense of taste, your doctor may be able to adjust or change your medicine. if not, he or she may suggest ways to manage your problem. do not stop taking your medications unless directed by your doctor. your doctor will work with you to get the medicine you need while trying to reduce unwanted side effects.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for problems with taste ?<answer>depending on the cause of your taste disorder, your doctor may be able to treat your problem or suggest ways to cope with it. if a certain medication is the cause of the problem, your doctor may be able to adjust or change your medicine. your doctor will work with you to get the medicine you need while trying to reduce unwanted side effects. some patients with respiratory infections regain their sense of taste when the illness is over. often, correcting a general medical problem can restore the sense of taste. occasionally, the sense of taste returns to normal on its own without any treatment.<end>
<question>what is (are) problems with taste ?<answer>taste, or gustation, is one of our most robust senses. although there is a small decline in taste in people over 60, most older people will not notice it because normal aging does not greatly affect our sense of taste. problems with taste occur less frequently than problems with smell. how our sense of taste works our sense of taste, along with our sense of smell, is part of our chemical sensing system. normal taste occurs when tiny molecules released by chewing or the digestion of food stimulate special sensory cells in the mouth and throat. these taste cells, or gustatory cells, send messages through three specialized taste nerves to the brain, where specific tastes are identified. damage to these nerves following head injury can lead to taste loss. the taste cells are clustered within the taste buds of the tongue and roof of the mouth, and along the lining of the throat. many of the small bumps that can be seen on the tip of the tongue contain taste buds. at birth, we have about 10,000 taste buds scattered on the back, sides, and tip of the tongue. after age 50, we may start to lose taste buds. five taste sensations we can experience five basic taste sensations: sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami, or savory. umami is the taste we get from glutamate, a building block of protein found in chicken broth, meat stock, and some cheeses. umami is also the taste associated wtih msg (monosodium glutamate) that is often added to foods as a flavor enhancer. the five taste qualities combine with other oral sensations, such as texture, spiciness, temperature, and aroma to produce what is commonly referred to as flavor. it is flavor that lets us know whether we are eating an apple or a pear. flavors and the sense of smell many people are surprised to learn that we recognize flavors largely through our sense of smell. try holding your nose while eating chocolate. you will be able to distinguish between its sweetness and bitterness, but you can't identify the chocolate flavor. that's because the distinguishing characteristic of chocolate is largely identified by our sense of smell as aromas are released during chewing. food flavor is affected by a head cold or nasal congestion because the aroma of food does not reach the sensory cells that detect odors. more information on this topic can be found in the topic problems with smell smell and taste closely linked smell and taste are closely linked senses. many people mistakenly believe they have a problem with taste, when they are really experiencing a problem with smell. it is common for people who lose their sense of smell to say that food has lost its taste. this is incorrect; the food has lost its aroma, but taste remains. in older people, there is a normal decline in the sense of smell and the taste of food shifts toward blandness. this is why people often believe they have a taste problem. when taste is impaired problems with taste can have a big impact on an older person's life. because taste affects the amount and type of food we eat, when there are problems with taste, a person may change his or her eating habits. some people may eat too much and gain weight, while others may eat too little and lose weight. a loss of appetite, especially in older adults, can lead to loss of weight, poor nutrition, weakened immunity, and even death. taste helps us detect spoiled food or liquids and it also helps some people detect ingredients they are allergic to. a problem with taste can weaken or remove an early warning system that most of us take for granted. a distorted sense of taste can be a serious risk factor for illnesses that require sticking to a specific diet. loss of taste can cause us to eat too much sugar or salt to make our food taste better. this can be a problem for people with such illnesses as diabetes or high blood pressure. in severe cases, loss of taste can lead to depression. taste problems are often temporary when an older person has a problem with taste, it is often temporary and minor. true taste disorders are uncommon. when a problem with taste exists, it is usually caused by medications, disease, some cancer treatments, or injury. many older people believe that there is nothing they can do about their weakened sense of taste. if you think you have a problem with your sense of taste, see your doctor. depending on the cause of your problem, your doctor may be able to suggest ways to regain your sense of taste or to cope with the loss of taste.<end>
<question>what is (are) problems with taste ?<answer>you can help your doctor make a diagnosis by writing down important information about your problem beforehand and giving the information to your doctor during your visit. write down answers to the following questions. - when did i first become aware of my taste problem? - what changes in my sense of taste did i notice? - do all foods and drinks taste the same? - have there been any changes in my sense of smell? - does the change in taste affect my ability to eat normally? - what medicines do i take? what are the names of the medicines? how much do i take? what is the health condition for which i take the medicine? - have i recently had a cold or the flu? when did i first become aware of my taste problem? what changes in my sense of taste did i notice? do all foods and drinks taste the same? have there been any changes in my sense of smell? does the change in taste affect my ability to eat normally? what medicines do i take? what are the names of the medicines? how much do i take? what is the health condition for which i take the medicine? have i recently had a cold or the flu?<end>
<question>what is (are) fanconi anemia ?<answer>fanconi anemia is a condition that affects many parts of the body. people with this condition may have bone marrow failure, physical abnormalities, organ defects, and an increased risk of certain cancers. the major function of bone marrow is to produce new blood cells. these include red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the body's tissues; white blood cells, which fight infections; and platelets, which are necessary for normal blood clotting. approximately 90 percent of people with fanconi anemia have impaired bone marrow function that leads to a decrease in the production of all blood cells (aplastic anemia). affected individuals experience extreme tiredness (fatigue) due to low numbers of red blood cells (anemia), frequent infections due to low numbers of white blood cells (neutropenia), and clotting problems due to low numbers of platelets (thrombocytopenia). people with fanconi anemia may also develop myelodysplastic syndrome, a condition in which immature blood cells fail to develop normally. more than half of people with fanconi anemia have physical abnormalities. these abnormalities can involve irregular skin coloring such as unusually light-colored skin (hypopigmentation) or caf-au-lait spots, which are flat patches on the skin that are darker than the surrounding area. other possible symptoms of fanconi anemia include malformed thumbs or forearms and other skeletal problems including short stature; malformed or absent kidneys and other defects of the urinary tract; gastrointestinal abnormalities; heart defects; eye abnormalities such as small or abnormally shaped eyes; and malformed ears and hearing loss. people with this condition may have abnormal genitalia or malformations of the reproductive system. as a result, most affected males and about half of affected females cannot have biological children (are infertile). additional signs and symptoms can include abnormalities of the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system), including increased fluid in the center of the brain (hydrocephalus) or an unusually small head size (microcephaly). individuals with fanconi anemia have an increased risk of developing a cancer of blood-forming cells in the bone marrow called acute myeloid leukemia (aml) or tumors of the head, neck, skin, gastrointestinal system, or genital tract. the likelihood of developing one of these cancers in people with fanconi anemia is between 10 and 30 percent.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to fanconi anemia ?<answer>mutations in at least 15 genes can cause fanconi anemia. proteins produced from these genes are involved in a cell process known as the fa pathway. the fa pathway is turned on (activated) when the process of making new copies of dna, called dna replication, is blocked due to dna damage. the fa pathway sends certain proteins to the area of damage, which trigger dna repair so dna replication can continue. the fa pathway is particularly responsive to a certain type of dna damage known as interstrand cross-links (icls). icls occur when two dna building blocks (nucleotides) on opposite strands of dna are abnormally attached or linked together, which stops the process of dna replication. icls can be caused by a buildup of toxic substances produced in the body or by treatment with certain cancer therapy drugs. eight proteins associated with fanconi anemia group together to form a complex known as the fa core complex. the fa core complex activates two proteins, called fancd2 and fanci. the activation of these two proteins brings dna repair proteins to the area of the icl so the cross-link can be removed and dna replication can continue. eighty to 90 percent of cases of fanconi anemia are due to mutations in one of three genes, fanca, fancc, and fancg. these genes provide instructions for producing components of the fa core complex. mutations in any of the many genes associated with the fa core complex will cause the complex to be nonfunctional and disrupt the entire fa pathway. as a result, dna damage is not repaired efficiently and icls build up over time. the icls stall dna replication, ultimately resulting in either abnormal cell death due to an inability make new dna molecules or uncontrolled cell growth due to a lack of dna repair processes. cells that divide quickly, such as bone marrow cells and cells of the developing fetus, are particularly affected. the death of these cells results in the decrease in blood cells and the physical abnormalities characteristic of fanconi anemia. when the buildup of errors in dna leads to uncontrolled cell growth, affected individuals can develop acute myeloid leukemia or other cancers.<end>
<question>what is (are) fanconi anemia ?<answer>fanconi anemia is an inherited condition that affects the bone marrow, resulting in decreased production of all types of blood cells. people with this condition have lower-than-normal numbers of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets (cells that help the blood clot). not enough white blood cells can lead to infections; a lack of red blood cells may result in anemia; and a decreased amount of platelets may lead to excess bleeding. fanconi anemia can be caused by mutations in various genes; it can either be inherited in an autosomal recessive or x-linked recessive fashion.<end>
<question>is fanconi anemia inherited ?<answer>fanconi anemia is most often inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. very rarely, this condition is inherited in an x-linked recessive pattern. the gene associated with x-linked recessive fanconi anemia is located on the x chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. in males (who have only one x chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. in females (who have two x chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by x-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. a characteristic of x-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass x-linked traits to their sons.<end>
<question>what is (are) septo-optic dysplasia ?<answer>septo-optic dysplasia is a disorder of early brain development. although its signs and symptoms vary, this condition is traditionally defined by three characteristic features: underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the optic nerves, abnormal formation of structures along the midline of the brain, and pituitary hypoplasia. the first major feature, optic nerve hypoplasia, is the underdevelopment of the optic nerves, which carry visual information from the eyes to the brain. in affected individuals, the optic nerves are abnormally small and make fewer connections than usual between the eyes and the brain. as a result, people with optic nerve hypoplasia have impaired vision in one or both eyes. optic nerve hypoplasia can also be associated with unusual side-to-side eye movements (nystagmus) and other eye abnormalities. the second characteristic feature of septo-optic dysplasia is the abnormal development of structures separating the right and left halves of the brain. these structures include the corpus callosum, which is a band of tissue that connects the two halves of the brain, and the septum pellucidum, which separates the fluid-filled spaces called ventricles in the brain. in the early stages of brain development, these structures may form abnormally or fail to develop at all. depending on which structures are affected, abnormal brain development can lead to intellectual disability and other neurological problems. the third major feature of this disorder is pituitary hypoplasia. the pituitary is a gland at the base of the brain that produces several hormones. these hormones help control growth, reproduction, and other critical body functions. underdevelopment of the pituitary can lead to a shortage (deficiency) of many essential hormones. most commonly, pituitary hypoplasia causes growth hormone deficiency, which results in slow growth and unusually short stature. severe cases cause panhypopituitarism, a condition in which the pituitary produces no hormones. panhypopituitarism is associated with slow growth, low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), genital abnormalities, and problems with sexual development. the signs and symptoms of septo-optic dysplasia can vary significantly. some researchers suggest that septo-optic dysplasia should actually be considered a group of related conditions rather than a single disorder. about one-third of people diagnosed with septo-optic dysplasia have all three major features; most affected individuals have two of the major features. in rare cases, septo-optic dysplasia is associated with additional signs and symptoms, including recurrent seizures (epilepsy), delayed development, and abnormal movements.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to septo-optic dysplasia ?<answer>in most cases of septo-optic dysplasia, the cause of the disorder is unknown. researchers suspect that a combination of genetic and environmental factors may play a role in causing this disorder. proposed environmental risk factors include viral infections, specific medications, and a disruption in blood flow to certain areas of the brain during critical periods of development. at least three genes have been associated with septo-optic dysplasia, although mutations in these genes appear to be rare causes of this disorder. the three genes, hesx1, otx2, and sox2, all play important roles in embryonic development. in particular, they are essential for the formation of the eyes, the pituitary gland, and structures at the front of the brain (the forebrain) such as the optic nerves. mutations in any of these genes disrupt the early development of these structures, which leads to the major features of septo-optic dysplasia. researchers are looking for additional genetic changes that contribute to septo-optic dysplasia.<end>
<question>what is (are) septo-optic dysplasia ?<answer>septo-optic dysplasia is a disorder of early brain development. the signs and symptoms vary from person to person; however, underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the optic nerve, abnormal formation of structures along the midline of the brain, and pituitary hypoplasia are the characteristic findings. recurring seizures, delayed development, and abnormal movements may be present in some people with septo-optic dysplasia. although the exact cause of septo-optic dysplasia is unknown, it is believed that both genetic and environmental factors play a role. viruses, medications, and blood flow disruption have all been suggested as possible environmental causes. thus far, three genes (hesx1, otx2, and sox2) have been associated with septo-optic dysplasia. typically, people do not have a family history of septo-optic dysplasia. however, there have been a few cases in which multiple family members have been diagnosed. familial cases may follow an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.<end>
<question>is septo-optic dysplasia inherited ?<answer>septo-optic dysplasia is usually sporadic, which means that the condition typically occurs in people with no history of the disorder in their family. less commonly, septo-optic dysplasia has been found to run in families. most familial cases appear to have an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means that both copies of an associated gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. in a few affected families, the disorder has had an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition.<end>
<question>what is (are) pelizaeus-merzbacher disease ?<answer>pelizaeus-merzbacher disease is an inherited condition involving the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). this disease is one of a group of genetic disorders called leukodystrophies. leukodystrophies are characterized by degeneration of myelin, which is the covering that protects nerves and promotes the efficient transmission of nerve impulses. pelizaeus-merzbacher disease is caused by an inability to form myelin (dysmyelination). as a result, individuals with this condition have impaired intellectual functions, such as language and memory, and delayed motor skills, such as coordination and walking. typically, motor skills are more severely affected than intellectual function; motor skills development tends to occur more slowly and usually stops in a person's teens, followed by gradual deterioration. pelizaeus-merzbacher disease is divided into classic and connatal types. although these two types differ in severity, their features can overlap. classic pelizaeus-merzbacher disease is the more common type. within the first year of life, those affected with classic pelizaeus-merzbacher disease typically experience weak muscle tone (hypotonia), involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus), and delayed development of motor skills such as crawling or walking. as the child gets older, nystagmus usually stops but other movement disorders develop, including muscle stiffness (spasticity), problems with movement and balance (ataxia), and involuntary jerking (choreiform movements). connatal pelizaeus-merzbacher disease is the more severe of the two types. symptoms can begin in infancy and include problems feeding, a whistling sound when breathing, progressive spasticity leading to joint deformities (contractures) that restrict movement, speech difficulties (dysarthria), ataxia, and seizures. those affected with connatal pelizaeus-merzbacher disease show little development of motor skills and intellectual function.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to pelizaeus-merzbacher disease ?<answer>mutations in the plp1 gene cause pelizaeus-merzbacher disease. the plp1 gene provides instructions for producing proteolipid protein 1 and a modified version (isoform) of proteolipid protein 1, called dm20. proteolipid protein 1 and dm20 are primarily located in the central nervous system and are the main proteins found in myelin, the fatty covering that insulates nerve fibers. a lack of proteolipid protein 1 and dm20 can cause dysmyelination, which can impair nervous system function, resulting in the signs and symptoms of pelizaeus-merzbacher disease. it is estimated that 5 percent to 20 percent of people with pelizaeus-merzbacher disease do not have identified mutations in the plp1 gene. in these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown.<end>
<question>what is (are) pelizaeus-merzbacher disease ?<answer>pelizaeus-merzbacher disease is a disorder that affects the brain and spinal cord. it is a type of leukodystrophy and is characterized by problems with coordination, motor skills, and learning. the age of onset and the severity of the symptoms varies greatly depending on the type of disease. it is caused by an inability to form myelin due to mutations in the plp1 gene. it is passed through families in an x-linked recessive pattern. the condition primarily affects males. treatment requires a multidisciplinary team approach, with members dictated by the presenting symptoms.<end>
<question>is pelizaeus-merzbacher disease inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an x-linked recessive pattern. a condition is considered x-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the x chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. in males (who have only one x chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. because females have two copies of the x chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell usually leads to less severe symptoms in females than in males, or may cause no symptoms at all. a characteristic of x-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass x-linked traits to their sons. in x-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one altered copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. she can pass on the gene, but generally does not experience signs and symptoms of the disorder. some females who carry a plp1 mutation, however, may experience muscle stiffness and a decrease in intellectual function. females with one plp1 mutation have an increased risk of experiencing progressive deterioration of cognitive functions (dementia) later in life.<end>
<question>what is (are) troyer syndrome ?<answer>troyer syndrome is part of a group of genetic disorders known as hereditary spastic paraplegias. these disorders are characterized by progressive muscle stiffness (spasticity) and the development of paralysis of the lower limbs (paraplegia). hereditary spastic paraplegias are divided into two types: pure and complex. the pure types involve the lower limbs. the complex types involve the lower limbs and can also affect the upper limbs to a lesser degree; the structure or functioning of the brain; and the nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound (the peripheral nervous system). troyer syndrome is a complex hereditary spastic paraplegia. people with troyer syndrome can experience a variety of signs and symptoms. the most common characteristics of troyer syndrome are spasticity of the leg muscles, progressive muscle weakness, paraplegia, muscle wasting in the hands and feet (distal amyotrophy), small stature, developmental delay, learning disorders, speech difficulties (dysarthria), and mood swings. other characteristics can include exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) in the lower limbs, uncontrollable movements of the limbs (choreoathetosis), skeletal abnormalities, and a bending outward (valgus) of the knees. troyer syndrome causes the degeneration and death of muscle cells and motor neurons (specialized nerve cells that control muscle movement) throughout a person's lifetime, leading to a slow progressive decline in muscle and nerve function. the severity of impairment related to troyer syndrome increases as a person ages. most affected individuals require a wheelchair by the time they are in their fifties or sixties.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to troyer syndrome ?<answer>troyer syndrome is caused by a mutation in the spg20 gene. the spg20 gene provides instructions for producing a protein called spartin, whose function is not entirely understood. researchers believe that spartin may be involved in a variety of cell functions, from breaking down proteins to transporting materials from the cell surface into the cell (endocytosis). spartin is found in a wide range of body tissues, including the nervous system.<end>
<question>what is (are) troyer syndrome ?<answer>troyer syndrome is a neurological disorder and one of the many types of hereditary spastic paraplegia. signs and symptoms typically begin in early childhood and may include progressive muscle weakness and stiffness (spasticity) in the legs; muscle wasting in the hands and feet; paraplegia; leg contractures; developmental delays; speech difficulty; mood swings; and short stature. symptoms worsen over time, with most people needing a wheelchair by their 50s or 60s. life expectancy is normal. troyer syndrome is caused by mutations in the spg20 gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. treatment is symptomatic and supportive.<end>
<question>is troyer syndrome inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.<end>
<question>what is (are) retinoblastoma ?<answer>retinoblastoma is a rare type of eye cancer that usually develops in early childhood, typically before the age of 5. this form of cancer develops in the retina, which is the specialized light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color. in most children with retinoblastoma, the disease affects only one eye. however, one out of three children with retinoblastoma develops cancer in both eyes. the most common first sign of retinoblastoma is a visible whiteness in the pupil called "cat's eye reflex" or leukocoria. this unusual whiteness is particularly noticeable in photographs taken with a flash. other signs and symptoms of retinoblastoma include crossed eyes or eyes that do not point in the same direction (strabismus); persistent eye pain, redness, or irritation; and blindness or poor vision in the affected eye(s). retinoblastoma is often curable when it is diagnosed early. however, if it is not treated promptly, this cancer can spread beyond the eye to other parts of the body. this advanced form of retinoblastoma can be life-threatening. when retinoblastoma is associated with a gene mutation that occurs in all of the body's cells, it is known as germinal retinoblastoma. people with this form of retinoblastoma also have an increased risk of developing several other cancers outside the eye. specifically, they are more likely to develop a cancer of the pineal gland in the brain (pinealoma), a type of bone cancer known as osteosarcoma, cancers of soft tissues such as muscle, and an aggressive form of skin cancer called melanoma.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to retinoblastoma ?<answer>mutations in the rb1 gene are responsible for most cases of retinoblastoma. rb1 is a tumor suppressor gene, which means that it normally regulates cell growth and keeps cells from dividing too rapidly or in an uncontrolled way. most mutations in the rb1 gene prevent it from making any functional protein, so it is unable to regulate cell division effectively. as a result, certain cells in the retina can divide uncontrollably to form a cancerous tumor. some studies suggest that additional genetic changes can influence the development of retinoblastoma; these changes may help explain variations in the development and growth of tumors in different people. a small percentage of retinoblastomas are caused by deletions in the region of chromosome 13 that contains the rb1 gene. because these chromosomal changes involve several genes in addition to rb1, affected children usually also have intellectual disability, slow growth, and distinctive facial features (such as prominent eyebrows, a short nose with a broad nasal bridge, and ear abnormalities).<end>
<question>what is (are) retinoblastoma ?<answer>key points - retinoblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the retina. - retinoblastoma occurs in heritable and nonheritable forms. - treatment for both forms of retinoblastoma should include genetic counseling. - children with a family history of retinoblastoma should have eye exams to check for retinoblastoma. - a child who has heritable retinoblastoma has an increased risk of trilateral retinoblastoma and other cancers. - signs and symptoms of retinoblastoma include "white pupil" and eye pain or redness. - tests that examine the retina are used to detect (find) and diagnose retinoblastoma. - certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. retinoblastoma is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the retina. the retina is the nerve tissue that lines the inside of the back of the eye. the retina senses light and sends images to the brain by way of the optic nerve. although retinoblastoma may occur at any age, it occurs most often in children younger than 2 years. the cancer may be in one eye (unilateral) or in both eyes (bilateral). retinoblastoma rarely spreads from the eye to nearby tissue or other parts of the body. cavitary retinoblastoma is a rare type of retinoblastoma in which cavities (hollow spaces) form within the tumor. treatment for both forms of retinoblastoma should include genetic counseling. parents should receive genetic counseling (a discussion with a trained professional about the risk of genetic diseases) to discuss genetic testing to check for a mutation (change) in the rb1 gene. genetic counseling also includes a discussion of the risk of retinoblastoma for the child and the child's brothers or sisters.<end>
<question>is retinoblastoma inherited ?<answer>researchers estimate that 40 percent of all retinoblastomas are germinal, which means that rb1 mutations occur in all of the body's cells, including reproductive cells (sperm or eggs). people with germinal retinoblastoma may have a family history of the disease, and they are at risk of passing on the mutated rb1 gene to the next generation. the other 60 percent of retinoblastomas are non-germinal, which means that rb1 mutations occur only in the eye and cannot be passed to the next generation. in germinal retinoblastoma, mutations in the rb1 gene appear to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. autosomal dominant inheritance suggests that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to increase cancer risk. a person with germinal retinoblastoma may inherit an altered copy of the gene from one parent, or the altered gene may be the result of a new mutation that occurs in an egg or sperm cell or just after fertilization. for retinoblastoma to develop, a mutation involving the other copy of the rb1 gene must occur in retinal cells during the person's lifetime. this second mutation usually occurs in childhood, typically leading to the development of retinoblastoma in both eyes. in the non-germinal form of retinoblastoma, typically only one eye is affected and there is no family history of the disease. affected individuals are born with two normal copies of the rb1 gene. then, usually in early childhood, both copies of the rb1 gene in retinal cells acquire mutations or are lost. people with non-germinal retinoblastoma are not at risk of passing these rb1 mutations to their children. however, without genetic testing it can be difficult to tell whether a person with retinoblastoma in one eye has the germinal or the non-germinal form of the disease.<end>
<question>what are the stages of endometrial cancer ?<answer>key points - after endometrial cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the uterus or to other parts of the body. - there are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. - cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. - the following stages are used for endometrial cancer: - stage i - stage ii - stage iii - stage iv - endometrial cancer may be grouped for treatment as follows: - low-risk endometrial cancer - high-risk endometrial cancer after endometrial cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the uterus or to other parts of the body. the process used to find out whether the cancer has spread within the uterus or to other parts of the body is called staging. the information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. it is important to know the stage in order to plan treatment. certain tests and procedures are used in the staging process. a hysterectomy (an operation in which the uterus is removed) will usually be done to treat endometrial cancer. tissue samples are taken from the area around the uterus and checked under a microscope for signs of cancer to help find out whether the cancer has spread. the following procedures may be used in the staging process: - pelvic exam : an exam of the vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and rectum. a speculum is inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease. a pap test of the cervix is usually done. the doctor or nurse also inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and places the other hand over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries. the doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas. - chest x-ray : an x-ray of the organs and bones inside the chest. an x-ray is a type of energy beam that can go through the body and onto film, making a picture of areas inside the body. - ct scan (cat scan): a procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles. the pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine. a dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly. this procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography. - mri (magnetic resonance imaging): a procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body. this procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (nmri). - pet scan (positron emission tomography scan): a procedure to find malignant tumor cells in the body. a small amount of radioactive glucose (sugar) is injected into a vein. the pet scanner rotates around the body and makes a picture of where glucose is being used in the body. malignant tumor cells show up brighter in the picture because they are more active and take up more glucose than normal cells do. - lymph node dissection : a surgical procedure in which the lymph nodes are removed from the pelvic area and a sample of tissue is checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. this procedure is also called lymphadenectomy. there are three ways that cancer spreads in the body. cancer can spread through tissue, the lymph system, and the blood: - tissue. the cancer spreads from where it began by growing into nearby areas. - lymph system. the cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the lymph system. the cancer travels through the lymph vessels to other parts of the body. - blood. the cancer spreads from where it began by getting into the blood. the cancer travels through the blood vessels to other parts of the body. cancer may spread from where it began to other parts of the body. when cancer spreads to another part of the body, it is called metastasis. cancer cells break away from where they began (the primary tumor) and travel through the lymph system or blood. - lymph system. the cancer gets into the lymph system, travels through the lymph vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. - blood. the cancer gets into the blood, travels through the blood vessels, and forms a tumor (metastatic tumor) in another part of the body. the metastatic tumor is the same type of cancer as the primary tumor. for example, if endometrial cancer spreads to the lung, the cancer cells in the lung are actually endometrial cancer cells. the disease is metastatic endometrial cancer, not lung cancer. the following stages are used for endometrial cancer: stage i in stage i, cancer is found in the uterus only. stage i is divided into stages ia and ib, based on how far the cancer has spread. - stage ia: cancer is in the endometrium only or less than halfway through the myometrium (muscle layer of the uterus). - stage ib: cancer has spread halfway or more into the myometrium. stage ii in stage ii, cancer has spread into connective tissue of the cervix, but has not spread outside the uterus. stage iii in stage iii, cancer has spread beyond the uterus and cervix, but has not spread beyond the pelvis. stage iii is divided into stages iiia, iiib, and iiic, based on how far the cancer has spread within the pelvis. - stage iiia: cancer has spread to the outer layer of the uterus and/or to the fallopian tubes, ovaries, and ligaments of the uterus. - stage iiib: cancer has spread to the vagina and/or to the parametrium (connective tissue and fat around the uterus). - stage iiic: cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the pelvis and/or around the aorta (largest artery in the body, which carries blood away from the heart). stage iv in stage iv, cancer has spread beyond the pelvis. stage iv is divided into stages iva and ivb, based on how far the cancer has spread. - stage iva: cancer has spread to the bladder and/or bowel wall. - stage ivb: cancer has spread to other parts of the body beyond the pelvis, including the abdomen and/or lymph nodes in the groin. endometrial cancer may be grouped for treatment as follows: low-risk endometrial cancer grades 1 and 2 tumors are usually considered low-risk. they usually do not spread to other parts of the body. high-risk endometrial cancer grade 3 tumors are considered high-risk. they often spread to other parts of the body. uterine papillary serous, clear cell, and carcinosarcoma are three subtypes of endometrial cancer that are considered grade 3.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for endometrial cancer ?<answer>new types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials. information about clinical trials is available from the nci website. patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial. for some patients, taking part in a clinical trial may be the best treatment choice. clinical trials are part of the cancer research process. clinical trials are done to find out if new cancer treatments are safe and effective or better than the standard treatment. many of today's standard treatments for cancer are based on earlier clinical trials. patients who take part in a clinical trial may receive the standard treatment or be among the first to receive a new treatment. patients who take part in clinical trials also help improve the way cancer will be treated in the future. even when clinical trials do not lead to effective new treatments, they often answer important questions and help move research forward. patients can enter clinical trials before, during, or after starting their cancer treatment. some clinical trials only include patients who have not yet received treatment. other trials test treatments for patients whose cancer has not gotten better. there are also clinical trials that test new ways to stop cancer from recurring (coming back) or reduce the side effects of cancer treatment. clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country. see the treatment options section that follows for links to current treatment clinical trials. these have been retrieved from nci's listing of clinical trials.<end>
<question>what is (are) endometrial cancer ?<answer>key points - endometrial cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the endometrium. - endometrial cancer is the most common invasive cancer of the female reproductive system. endometrial cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the endometrium. the endometrium is the lining of the uterus. the uterus is part of the female reproductive system. it is a hollow, pear-shaped, muscular organ in the pelvis, where a fetus grows. cancer of the endometrium is different from cancer of the muscle of the uterus, which is called sarcoma of the uterus. see the pdq summary on uterine sarcoma treatment for more information. see the following pdq summaries for more information about endometrial cancer: - endometrial cancer screening - endometrial cancer treatment endometrial cancer is the most common invasive cancer of the female reproductive system. endometrial cancer is diagnosed most often in postmenopausal women at an average age of 60 years . from 2004 to 2013, the number of new cases of endometrial cancer increased slightly in white and african american women. from 2005 to 2014, the number of deaths from endometrial cancer also increased slightly in white and african american women. compared with white women, rates of endometrial cancer are lower in japanese americans and in latinas. the rates of endometrial cancer in white women are about the same as in african americans or in native hawaiians. the number of deaths from endometrial cancer is higher in african american women compared with women of other races.<end>
<question>what is (are) endometrial cancer ?<answer>key points - endometrial cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the endometrium. - in the united states, endometrial cancer is the most common invasive cancer of the female reproductive system. - health history and certain medicines can affect the risk of developing endometrial cancer. endometrial cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissues of the endometrium. the endometrium is the innermost lining of the uterus. the uterus is a hollow, muscular organ in a woman's pelvis. the uterus is where a fetus grows. in most nonpregnant women, the uterus is about 3 inches long. cancer of the endometrium is different from cancer of the muscle of the uterus, which is called uterine sarcoma. see the pdq summary on uterine sarcoma treatment for more information. see the following pdq summaries for more information about endometrial cancer: - endometrial cancer treatment - endometrial cancer prevention in the united states, endometrial cancer is the most common invasive cancer of the female reproductive system. endometrial cancer is diagnosed most often in postmenopausal women at an average age of 60 years. from 2004 to 2013, the number of new cases of endometrial cancer increased slightly in white and black women. from 2005 to 2014, the number of deaths from endometrial cancer increased slightly in white and black women. when endometrial cancer is diagnosed in black women, it is usually more advanced and less likely to be cured.<end>
<question>what is (are) essential tremor ?<answer>essential tremor is a movement disorder that causes involuntary, rhythmic shaking (tremor), especially in the hands. it is distinguished from tremor that results from other disorders or known causes, such as parkinson disease or head trauma. essential tremor usually occurs alone, without other neurological signs or symptoms. however, some experts think that essential tremor can include additional features, such as mild balance problems. essential tremor usually occurs with movements and can occur during many different types of activities, such as eating, drinking, or writing. essential tremor can also occur when the muscles are opposing gravity, such as when the hands are extended. it is usually not evident at rest. in addition to the hands and arms, muscles of the trunk, face, head, and neck may also exhibit tremor in this disorder; the legs and feet are less often involved. head tremor may appear as a "yes-yes" or "no-no" movement while the affected individual is seated or standing. in some people with essential tremor, the tremor may affect the voice (vocal tremor). essential tremor does not shorten the lifespan. however, it may interfere with fine motor skills such as using eating utensils, writing, shaving, or applying makeup, and in some cases these and other activities of daily living can be greatly impaired. symptoms of essential tremor may be aggravated by emotional stress, anxiety, fatigue, hunger, caffeine, cigarette smoking, or temperature extremes. essential tremor may appear at any age but is most common in the elderly. some studies have suggested that people with essential tremor have a higher than average risk of developing neurological conditions including parkinson disease or sensory problems such as hearing loss, especially in individuals whose tremor appears after age 65.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to essential tremor ?<answer>the causes of essential tremor are unknown. researchers are studying several areas (loci) on particular chromosomes that may be linked to essential tremor, but no specific genetic associations have been confirmed. several genes as well as environmental factors likely help determine an individual's risk of developing this complex condition. the specific changes in the nervous system that account for the signs and symptoms of essential tremor are unknown.<end>
<question>what is (are) essential tremor ?<answer>essential tremor is the most common movement disorder. it is characterized by involuntary and rhythmic shaking (tremor), especially in the hands, without any other signs or symptoms. it is distinguished from tremor that results from other disorders or known causes, such as tremors seen with parkinson disease or head trauma. most cases of essential tremor are hereditary. there are five forms of essential tremor that are based on different genetic causes. several genes as well as lifestyle and environmental factors likely play a role in a person's risk of developing this complex condition. in mild cases, treatment may not be necessary. in cases where symptoms interfere with daily living, medications may help to relieve symptoms.<end>
<question>is essential tremor inherited ?<answer>essential tremor can be passed through generations in families, but the inheritance pattern varies. in most affected families, essential tremor appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of an altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder, although no genes that cause essential tremor have been identified. in other families, the inheritance pattern is unclear. essential tremor may also appear in people with no history of the disorder in their family. in some families, some individuals have essential tremor while others have other movement disorders, such as involuntary muscle tensing (dystonia). the potential genetic connection between essential tremor and other movement disorders is an active area of research.<end>
<question>what is (are) von willebrand disease ?<answer>von willebrand disease is a bleeding disorder that slows the blood clotting process, causing prolonged bleeding after an injury. people with this condition often experience easy bruising, long-lasting nosebleeds, and excessive bleeding or oozing following an injury, surgery, or dental work. mild forms of von willebrand disease may become apparent only when abnormal bleeding occurs following surgery or a serious injury. women with this condition typically have heavy or prolonged bleeding during menstruation (menorrhagia), and some may also experience reproductive tract bleeding during pregnancy and childbirth. in severe cases of von willebrand disease, heavy bleeding occurs after minor trauma or even in the absence of injury (spontaneous bleeding). symptoms of von willebrand disease may change over time. increased age, pregnancy, exercise, and stress may cause bleeding symptoms to become less frequent. von willebrand disease is divided into three types, with type 2 being further divided into four subtypes. type 1 is the mildest and most common of the three types, accounting for 75 percent of affected individuals. type 3 is the most severe and rarest form of the condition. the four subtypes of type 2 von willebrand disease are intermediate in severity. another form of the disorder, acquired von willebrand syndrome, is not caused by inherited gene mutations. acquired von willebrand syndrome is typically seen along with other disorders, such as diseases that affect bone marrow or immune cell function. this rare form of the condition is characterized by abnormal bleeding into the skin and other soft tissues, usually beginning in adulthood.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to von willebrand disease ?<answer>mutations in the vwf gene cause von willebrand disease. the vwf gene provides instructions for making a blood clotting protein called von willebrand factor, which is essential for the formation of blood clots. after an injury, clots protect the body by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing further blood loss. von willebrand factor acts as a glue to hold blood clots together and prevents the breakdown of other blood clotting proteins. if von willebrand factor does not function normally or too little of the protein is available, blood clots cannot form properly. abnormally slow blood clotting causes the prolonged bleeding episodes seen in von willebrand disease. the three types of von willebrand disease are based upon the amount of von willebrand factor that is produced. mutations in the vwf gene that reduce the amount of von willebrand factor cause type 1 von willebrand disease. people with type 1 have varying amounts of von willebrand factor in their bloodstream. some people with a mild case of type 1 never experience a prolonged bleeding episode. mutations that disrupt the function of von willebrand factor cause the four subtypes of type 2 von willebrand disease. people with type 2 von willebrand disease have bleeding episodes of varying severity depending on the extent of von willebrand factor dysfunction, but the bleeding episodes are typically similar to those seen in type 1. mutations that result in an abnormally short, nonfunctional von willebrand factor generally cause type 3 von willebrand disease. because there is no functional protein, people with type 3 von willebrand disease usually have severe bleeding episodes.<end>
<question>what is (are) von willebrand disease ?<answer>von willebrand disease is a bleeding disorder that slows the blood clotting process. people with this disease often experience bruising, nosebleeds, and prolonged bleeding or oozing following an injury, surgery, or having a tooth pulled. in severe cases, heavy bleeding occurs after minor injury or even in the absence of injury. milder forms of von willebrand disease do not involve spontaneous bleeding, and the disease may become apparent only when abnormal bleeding occurs following surgery or a serious injury. symptoms may change over time. increased age, pregnancy, exercise, and stress may make bleeding symptoms may become less frequent. this disease is caused by mutations in the vwf gene and can have different inheritance patterns.<end>
<question>is von willebrand disease inherited ?<answer>von willebrand disease can have different inheritance patterns. most cases of type 1 and type 2 von willebrand disease are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. type 3, some cases of type 2, and a small number of type 1 cases of von willebrand disease are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for osteoarthritis ?<answer>warm towels, hot packs, or a warm bath or shower can provide temporary pain relief. medications such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or nsaids, help reduce pain and inflammation that result from osteoarthritis. a doctor or physical therapist can recommend if heat or cold is the best treatment. for osteoarthritis in the knee, wearing insoles or cushioned shoes may reduce joint stress.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for osteoarthritis ?<answer>doctors consider a number of factors when choosing medicines for their patients. in particular, they look at the type of pain the patient may be having and any possible side effects from the drugs. for pain relief, doctors usually start with acetaminophen because the side effects are minimal. if acetaminophen does not relieve pain, then non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen may be used. some nsaids are available over the counter, while more than a dozen others, including a subclass called cox-2 inhibitors, are available only with a prescription. corticosteroids, hyaluronic acid, and topical creams are also used. most medicines used to treat osteoarthritis have side effects, so it is important for people to learn about the medicines they take. for example, people over age 65 and those with any history of ulcers or stomach bleeding should use non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or nsaids, with caution. there are measures you can take to help reduce the risk of side effects associated with nsaids. these include taking medications with food and avoiding stomach irritants such as alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine. in some cases, it may help to take another medication along with an nsaid to coat the stomach or block stomach acids. although these measures may help, they are not always completely effective. for more tips on how older adults can avoid medication side effects, see side effects in the taking medicines topic.<end>
<question>what is (are) osteoarthritis ?<answer>affects many older people osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis among older people, and it is one of the most frequent causes of physical disability among older adults. the disease affects both men and women. before age 45, osteoarthritis is more common in men than in women. after age 45, osteoarthritis is more common in women. it is estimated that 33.6% (12.4 million) of individuals age 65 and older are affected by the disease. osteoarthritis occurs when cartilage, the tissue that cushions the ends of the bones within the joints, breaks down and wears away. in some cases, all of the cartilage may wear away, leaving bones that rub up against each other. joint stiffness and pain symptoms range from stiffness and mild pain that comes and goes to severe joint pain. osteoarthritis affects hands, low back, neck, and weight-bearing joints such as knees, hips, and feet. osteoarthritis affects just joints, not internal organs. hands osteoarthritis of the hands seems to run in families. if your mother or grandmother has or had osteoarthritis in their hands, youre at greater-than-average risk of having it too. women are more likely than men to have osteoarthritis in the hands. for most women, it develops after menopause. when osteoarthritis involves the hands, small, bony knobs may appear on the end joints (those closest to the nails) of the fingers. they are called heberdens (heberr-denz) nodes. similar knobs, called bouchards (boo-shardz) nodes, can appear on the middle joints of the fingers. fingers can become enlarged and gnarled, and they may ache or be stiff and numb. the base of the thumb joint also is commonly affected by osteoarthritis. knees the knees are among the joints most commonly affected by osteoarthritis. symptoms of knee osteoarthritis include stiffness, swelling, and pain, which make it hard to walk, climb, and get in and out of chairs and bathtubs. osteoarthritis in the knees can lead to disability. hips the hips are also common sites of osteoarthritis. as with knee osteoarthritis, symptoms of hip osteoarthritis include pain and stiffness of the joint itself. but sometimes pain is felt in the groin, inner thigh, buttocks, or even the knees. osteoarthritis of the hip may limit moving and bending, making daily activities such as dressing and putting on shoes a challenge. spine osteoarthritis of the spine may show up as stiffness and pain in the neck or lower back. in some cases, arthritis-related changes in the spine can cause pressure on the nerves where they exit the spinal column, resulting in weakness, tingling, or numbness of the arms and legs. in severe cases, this can even affect bladder and bowel function.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for osteoarthritis ?<answer>for many people, surgery helps relieve the pain and disability of osteoarthritis. surgery may be performed to achieve one or more of the following. - removal of loose pieces of bone and cartilage from the joint if they are causing symptoms of buckling or locking (arthroscopic debridement). - repositioning of bones (osteotomy). - resurfacing (smoothing out) bones (joint resurfacing). removal of loose pieces of bone and cartilage from the joint if they are causing symptoms of buckling or locking (arthroscopic debridement). repositioning of bones (osteotomy). resurfacing (smoothing out) bones (joint resurfacing). the decision to use surgery depends on several factors, including the patients age, occupation, level of disability, pain intensity, and the degree to which arthritis interferes with his or her lifestyle. after surgery and rehabilitation, the patient usually feels less pain and swelling and can move more easily.<end>
<question>what to do for kidney dysplasia ?<answer>researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing kidney dysplasia.<end>
<question>what is the outlook for kidney dysplasia ?<answer>the long-term outlook for a child with kidney dysplasia in only one kidney is generally good. a person with one working kidney, a condition called solitary kidney, can grow normally and may have few, if any, health problems. the affected kidney may shrink as the child grows. by age 10,3 the affected kidney may no longer be visible on x-ray or ultrasound. children and adults with only one working kidney should have regular checkups to test for high blood pressure and kidney damage. a child with urinary tract problems that lead to failure of the working kidney may eventually need dialysis or a kidney transplant. more information is provided in the niddk health topics, solitary kidney, dialysis, and kidney transplants.<end>
<question>what is (are) kidney dysplasia ?<answer>kidney dysplasia is a condition in which the internal structures of one or both of a fetus kidneys do not develop normally while in the womb. during normal development, two thin tubes of muscle called ureters grow into the kidneys and branch out to form a network of tiny structures called tubules. the tubules collect urine as the fetus grows in the womb. in kidney dysplasia, the tubules fail to branch out completely. urine that would normally flow through the tubules has nowhere to go. urine collects inside the affected kidney and forms fluid-filled sacs called cysts. the cysts replace normal kidney tissue and prevent the kidney from functioning. kidney dysplasia can affect one kidney or both kidneys. babies with severe kidney dysplasia affecting both kidneys generally do not survive birth. those who do survive may need the following early in life: - blood-filtering treatments called dialysis - a kidney transplant children with dysplasia in only one kidney have normal kidney function if the other kidney is unaffected. those with mild dysplasia of both kidneys may not need dialysis or a kidney transplant for several years. kidney dysplasia is also called renal dysplasia or multicystic dysplastic kidney.<end>
<question>how to prevent kidney dysplasia ?<answer>researchers have not found a way to prevent kidney dysplasia caused by genetic factors or certain genetic syndromes. pregnant women can prevent kidney dysplasia by avoiding the use of certain prescription medications or illegal drugs during pregnancy. pregnant women should talk with their health care provider before taking any medications during pregnancy.<end>
<question>what research (or clinical trials) is being done for peripheral arterial disease (p.a.d.) ?<answer>the national heart, lung, and blood institute (nhlbi) supports research aimed at learning more about peripheral arterial disease (p.a.d.). for example, nhlbi-supported research on p.a.d. includes studies that - explore whether group walking sessions increase physical activity in people who have p.a.d. - compare how effective certain exercise programs are at reducing leg pain in people who have p.a.d. - examine how inflammation and insulin resistance affect people who have p.a.d. explore whether group walking sessions increase physical activity in people who have p.a.d. compare how effective certain exercise programs are at reducing leg pain in people who have p.a.d. examine how inflammation and insulin resistance affect people who have p.a.d. much of this research depends on the willingness of volunteers to take part in clinical trials. clinical trials test new ways to prevent, diagnose, or treat various diseases and conditions. carefully conducted clinical trials are the fastest and safest way to find treatments that work in people and ways to improve health. for more information about clinical trials related to p.a.d., talk with your doctor. you also can visit the following web sites to learn more about clinical research and to search for clinical trials. - http://www.nih.gov/health/clinicaltrials/ - http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ - http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/studies/index.htm - https://www.researchmatch.org/ - http://www.cleverstudy.org/ http://www.nih.gov/health/clinicaltrials/ http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/studies/index.htm https://www.researchmatch.org/ http://www.cleverstudy.org/<end>
<question>how to prevent peripheral arterial disease (p.a.d.) ?<answer>treatment and prevention for p.a.d. often includes making long-lasting lifestyle changes, such as - quitting smoking - lowering blood pressure - lowering high blood cholesterol levels - lowering high blood glucose levels if you have diabetes - getting regular physical activity - following a healthy eating plan that's low in total fat, saturated fat, trans fat, cholesterol, and sodium (salt). quitting smoking lowering blood pressure lowering high blood cholesterol levels lowering high blood glucose levels if you have diabetes getting regular physical activity following a healthy eating plan that's low in total fat, saturated fat, trans fat, cholesterol, and sodium (salt). two examples of healthy eating plans are therapeutic lifestyle changes (tlc) and dietary approaches to stop hypertension (dash).<end>
<question>what is (are) peripheral arterial disease (p.a.d.) ?<answer>arteries clogged with plaque peripheral arterial disease (p.a.d.) is a disease in which plaque (plak) builds up in the arteries that carry blood to your head, organs, and limbs. plaque is made up of fat, cholesterol, calcium, fibrous tissue, and other substances in the blood. when plaque builds up in the body's arteries, the condition is called atherosclerosis (ath-er-o-skler-o-sis). over time, plaque can harden and narrow the arteries. this limits the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your organs and other parts of your body. p.a.d. usually affects the arteries in the legs, but it can also affect the arteries that carry blood from your heart to your head, arms, kidneys, and stomach. blocked blood flow to your legs can cause pain and numbness. it also can raise your risk of getting an infection in the affected limbs. your body may have a hard time fighting the infection. why is p.a.d. dangerous? over time, the plaque may crack and cause blood clots to form. these blood clots can block arteries, causing pain, numbness, inflammation, and even permanent tissue damage in the affected part of the body. if severe enough, blocked blood flow can cause tissue death (also called gangrene.) in very serious cases, this can lead to leg amputation. p.a.d. currently affects 8 million to 12 million americans. about 1 in every 20 americans over the age of 50 has p.a.d. african americans are more than twice as likely as caucasians to have p.a.d. if you have p.a.d., your risk of coronary artery disease, heart attack, stroke, and transient ischemic attack ("mini-stroke") is much higher than in people without p.a.d. if you have coronary artery disease, you have a 1 in 3 chance of having blocked leg arteries. although p.a.d. is serious, it is treatable. if you have the disease, it's important to see your doctor regularly and treat the underlying atherosclerosis. other names for peripheral arterial disease - atherosclerotic peripheral arterial disease - claudication (klaw-dih-ka-shen) - hardening of the arteries - leg cramps from poor circulation - peripheral vascular disease - poor circulation - vascular disease atherosclerotic peripheral arterial disease claudication (klaw-dih-ka-shen) hardening of the arteries leg cramps from poor circulation peripheral vascular disease poor circulation vascular disease<end>
<question>how to diagnose peripheral arterial disease (p.a.d.) ?<answer>there are several tests used to diagnose p.a.d. these include - an ankle-brachial index (abi). this test compares blood pressure in your ankle to blood pressure in your arm. it shows how well blood is flowing in your limbs. - a doppler ultrasound. this test uses sound waves to show whether a blood vessel is blocked. a blood pressure cuff and special device measure blood flow in the veins and arteries of the limbs. a doppler ultrasound can help find out how where p.a.d. is. - a treadmill test. this test shows if you have any problems during normal walking, how severe your symptoms are, and what level of exercise brings them on. - a magnetic resonance angiogram (mra). this test uses magnetic and radio waves to take pictures of your blood vessels. an mra can find the location of a blocked blood vessel and show how severe the blockage is. - an arteriogram. this test is used to find the exact location of a blocked artery. dye is injected through a needle or catheter (thin tube) into an artery, then an x-ray is taken. the pictures from the x-ray can show the location, type, and extent of the blockage in the artery. - blood tests. these tests check for p.a.d. risk factors such as diabetes and high blood cholesterol levels. an ankle-brachial index (abi). this test compares blood pressure in your ankle to blood pressure in your arm. it shows how well blood is flowing in your limbs. a doppler ultrasound. this test uses sound waves to show whether a blood vessel is blocked. a blood pressure cuff and special device measure blood flow in the veins and arteries of the limbs. a doppler ultrasound can help find out how where p.a.d. is. a treadmill test. this test shows if you have any problems during normal walking, how severe your symptoms are, and what level of exercise brings them on. a magnetic resonance angiogram (mra). this test uses magnetic and radio waves to take pictures of your blood vessels. an mra can find the location of a blocked blood vessel and show how severe the blockage is. an arteriogram. this test is used to find the exact location of a blocked artery. dye is injected through a needle or catheter (thin tube) into an artery, then an x-ray is taken. the pictures from the x-ray can show the location, type, and extent of the blockage in the artery. blood tests. these tests check for p.a.d. risk factors such as diabetes and high blood cholesterol levels.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for dry eye ?<answer>dry eye can be a temporary or ongoing condition, so treatments can be short term or may extend over long periods of time. the goal of treatment is to keep the eyes moist and relieve symptoms. talk to your doctor to rule out other conditions that can cause dry eye, such as sjgren's syndrome. you may need to treat these conditions. if dry eye results from taking a medication, your doctor may recommend switching to a medication that does not cause dry eye as a side effect. here are treatments for dry eye. medication. cyclosporine, an anti-inflammatory medication, is a prescription eye drop available to treat certain kinds of dry eye. in people with certain kinds of dry eye, it may decrease damage to the cornea, increase basic tear production, and reduce symptoms of dry eye. it may take three to six months of twice-a-day dosages for the medication to work. some patients with severe dry eye may need to use corticosteroid eye drops that decrease inflammation under close observation by an eye care professional. nutritional supplements. in some patients with dry eye, supplements of omega-3 fatty acids (especially dha and epa) may decrease symptoms of irritation. talk with your eye care professional or your primary medical doctor about whether this is an option for you. lenses. if dry eye is a result of wearing contact lens for too long, your eye care practitioner may recommend another type of lens or reducing the number of hours you wear your lenses. in the case of severe dry eye, your eye care professional may advise you not to wear contact lenses at all. punctal plugs. another option to increase the available tears on the eye surface is to plug the drainage holes, small circular openings at the inner corners of the eyelids where tears drain from the eye into the nose. lacrimal plugs, also called punctal plugs, can be inserted painlessly by an eye care professional. these plugs are made of silicone or collagen. these plugs can be temporary or permanent. punctal cautery. in some cases, a simple surgery called punctal cautery is recommended to permanently close the drainage holes. the procedure works similarly to installing punctal plugs, but cannot be reversed.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of dry eye ?<answer>dry eye symptoms may include any of the following. - stinging or burning of the eye - a sandy or gritty feeling as if something is in the eye - episodes of excess tears following very dry eye periods - a stringy discharge from the eye - pain and redness of the eye - episodes of blurred vision - heavy eyelids - inability to cry when emotionally stressed - uncomfortable contact lenses - decreased ability to read, work on the computer, or do any activity that requires you to use your eyes for long periods of time - eye fatigue. stinging or burning of the eye a sandy or gritty feeling as if something is in the eye episodes of excess tears following very dry eye periods a stringy discharge from the eye pain and redness of the eye episodes of blurred vision heavy eyelids inability to cry when emotionally stressed uncomfortable contact lenses decreased ability to read, work on the computer, or do any activity that requires you to use your eyes for long periods of time eye fatigue. if you have symptoms that you think could result from dry eye, consult an eye care professional to get an accurate diagnosis of the condition and begin treatment.<end>
<question>what is (are) dry eye ?<answer>poor tear production dry eye occurs when the eye does not produce tears properly, or when the tears are of poor quality and dry up quickly. the eyes need tears for overall eye health and clear vision. dry eye can last a short time or it can be an ongoing condition. it can include a variety of symptoms, such as discomfort and pain. your eyes may sting and burn and you may have redness and a sandy or gritty feeling, as if something is in your eye. you may have blurry vision and your eyes may feel tired. having dry eyes can make it harder to do some activities, such as using a computer or reading for a long period of time, and it can make it hard to be in dry places, such as on an airplane. tears and eye health tears are necessary for overall eye health and clear vision. the eye constantly makes tears to bathe, nourish, and protect the cornea. the cornea is the clear, dome-shaped outer surface that covers the eye in front of the iris, which is the colored part of the eye. the eye also makes tears in response to emergencies, such as a particle of dust in the eye, an infection or irritation of the eye, or an onset of strong emotions. tears keep the eye moist, and wash away dust and debris. they also help protect the eye from infections. tears are made of proteins (including growth factors), body salts, and vitamins that maintain the health of the eye surface and prevent infection. tear components tears have three major components. - an outer, oily, fat layer produced by the meibomian glands (located in the eyelids) - a middle, watery, layer produced by the lacrimal glands (located just above the upper, outer corner of the eye) - an inner, mucous layer produced by goblet cells (located within a thin clear layer which covers the white part of the eye and the inner surface of the eyelids called the conjunctiva). an outer, oily, fat layer produced by the meibomian glands (located in the eyelids) a middle, watery, layer produced by the lacrimal glands (located just above the upper, outer corner of the eye) an inner, mucous layer produced by goblet cells (located within a thin clear layer which covers the white part of the eye and the inner surface of the eyelids called the conjunctiva). when the lacrimal glands do not make enough tears, dry eye can result. any disease process that changes the components of tears can make them unhealthy and result in dry eye. type of dry eye there are two types of dry eye: aqueous tear-deficient dry eye and evaporative dry eye. aqueous tear-deficient dry eye is a disorder in which the tear glands do not produce enough of the watery component of tears to maintain a healthy cornea. evaporative dry eye may result from inflammation of the meibomian glands, located in the eyelids. these glands make the oily part of tears that slows evaporation and keeps the tears stable. most people with dry eye will not have serious problems, but severe dry eye may lead to inflammation, ulcers, or scars on the cornea, and some loss of vision. permanent loss of vision from dry eye is uncommon.<end>
<question>what causes dry eye ?<answer>if your eyes dont make enough tears it can cause dry eye. anything that changes the components of tears can cause dry eye. many factors can lead to dry eye, including aging, medications, problems with eyelid function, disease, some types of eye surgery, environmental factors, and allergies.<end>
<question>what is (are) problems with smell ?<answer>you can help your doctor make a diagnosis by writing down important information about your problem beforehand and giving the information to your doctor during your visit. write down answers to the following questions. - when did i first become aware of the problem? - did i have a cold or the flu? - did i have a head injury? - was i exposed to air pollutants, pollen, pet dander, or dust to which i might be allergic? - is this a recurring problem? - does it come at any special time, such as during the hay fever season? when did i first become aware of the problem? did i have a cold or the flu? did i have a head injury? was i exposed to air pollutants, pollen, pet dander, or dust to which i might be allergic? is this a recurring problem? does it come at any special time, such as during the hay fever season?<end>
<question>how to diagnose problems with smell ?<answer>scientists have developed tests to determine the nature and extent of a person's smell disorder. tests measure the smallest amount of odor patients can detect as well as how accurately a person can identify different smells. an easily administered "scratch and sniff" test allows a person to scratch pieces of paper treated to release different odors, sniff them, and try to identify each odor from a list of possibilities. in this way, doctors can determine whether a person has a decreased ability to smell (hyposmia), the inability to detect any odors (anosmia), or another kind of smell disorder. in some cases, your doctor may need to perform a nasal examination with a nasal endoscope, an instrument that illuminates and magnifies the areas of the nose where the problem may exist. this test can help identify the area and extent of the problem and help your doctor select the right treatment. if your doctor suspects that upper regions of the nose and nasal sinuses that can't be seen by an endoscope are involved, he or she may order a specialized x-ray procedure, usually a ct scan, to look further into the nose and sinuses.<end>
<question>what is (are) problems with smell ?<answer>our sense of smell helps us enjoy life. we delight in the aromas of our favorite foods or the fragrance of flowers. our sense of smell also is a warning system, alerting us to danger signals such as a gas leak, spoiled food, or a fire. any loss in our sense of smell can have a negative effect on our quality of life. it also can be a sign of more serious health problems. aging and smell loss problems with smell increase as people get older, and they are more common in men than women. in one study, nearly one-quarter of men ages 6069 had a smell disorder, while about 11 percent of women in that age range reported a problem. many older people are not even aware that they have a problem with their sense of smell because the changes occur gradually over several years. they may not even notice that they are experiencing a loss of smell until there is an incident in which they don't detect food that has spoiled or the presence of dangerous smoke. how our sense of smell works the sense of smell, or olfaction, is part of our chemical sensing system, along with the sense of taste. normal smell occurs when odors around us, like the fragrance of flowers or the smell of baking bread, stimulate the specialized sensory cells, called olfactory sensory cells. olfactory sensory cells are located in a small patch of tissue high inside the nose. odors reach the olfactory sensory cells in two pathways. the first pathway is by inhaling, or sniffing, through your nose. when people think about smell, they generally think of this pathway. the second pathway is less familiar. it is a channel that connects the roof of the throat region to the nose. when we chew our food, aromas are released that access olfactory sensory cells through this channel. if you are congested due to a head cold or sinus infection, this channel is blocked, which temporarily affects your ability to appreciate the flavors of food. types of smell disorders people who experience smell disorders either have a decrease in their ability to smell or changes in the way they perceive odors. total smell loss is relatively rare, but a decrease in the sense of smell occurs more often, especially in older adults. a decreased sense of smell may be temporary and treatable with medication. there are several types of smell disorders depending on how the sense of smell is affected. - some people have hyposmia, which occurs when their ability to detect certain odors is reduced. - other people can't detect odor at all, which is called anosmia. - sometimes a loss of smell can be accompanied by a change in the perception of odors. this type of smell disorder is called dysosmia. familiar odors may become distorted, or an odor that usually smells pleasant instead smells foul. - still others may perceive a smell that isn't present at all, which is called phantosmia. - smell loss due to aging is called presbyosmia. some people have hyposmia, which occurs when their ability to detect certain odors is reduced. other people can't detect odor at all, which is called anosmia. sometimes a loss of smell can be accompanied by a change in the perception of odors. this type of smell disorder is called dysosmia. familiar odors may become distorted, or an odor that usually smells pleasant instead smells foul. still others may perceive a smell that isn't present at all, which is called phantosmia. smell loss due to aging is called presbyosmia. smell loss may signal other conditions problems with our chemical senses may be a sign of other serious health conditions. a smell disorder can be an early sign of parkinsons disease, alzheimers disease, or multiple sclerosis. it can also be related to other medical conditions, such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and malnutrition. getting a diagnosis early will help an individual deal better with the underlying condition or disease. smell and taste smell and taste are closely linked in the brain, but are actually distinct sensory systems. true tastes are detected by taste buds on the tongue and the roof of the mouth, as well as in the throat region, and are limited to sweet, salty, sour, bitter, savory and perhaps a few other sensations. the loss of smell is much more common than the loss of taste, and many people mistakenly believe they have a problem with taste, when they are really experiencing a problem with their sense of smell. a loss in taste or smell is diagnosed by your doctor using special taste and smell tests. smell loss and eating habits when smell is impaired, people usually have problems appreciating the subtle flavors of food, and say that food is less enjoyable. some people change their eating habits. some may eat too little and lose weight while others may eat too much and gain weight. either way, there may be a long-term impact on one's overall health. loss of smell may also cause us to eat too much sugar or salt to make our food taste better. this can be a problem for people with certain medical conditions, such as diabetes or high blood pressure. in severe cases, loss of smell can lead to depression. hazards of smell loss research shows that people with a total or partial loss of smell are almost twice as likely as people with normal smell to have certain kinds of accidents. the most common types of accidents in order of frequency involve - cooking - eating or drinking spoiled foods or toxic substances - failing to detect gas leaks or fires cooking eating or drinking spoiled foods or toxic substances failing to detect gas leaks or fires if you think you have a problem with your sense of smell, see your doctor.<end>
<question>what causes problems with smell ?<answer>in rare cases, certain medicines such as antibiotics or antihistamines may cause a change in your ability to smell. if you are taking these medications and notice a change in your sense of smell, talk to your doctor. you may be able to adjust or change your medicine to one that will not cause a problem with smell.<end>
<question>is angelman syndrome inherited ?<answer>most cases of angelman syndrome are not inherited, particularly those caused by a deletion in the maternal chromosome 15 or by paternal uniparental disomy. these genetic changes occur as random events during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm) or in early embryonic development. affected people typically have no history of the disorder in their family. rarely, a genetic change responsible for angelman syndrome can be inherited. for example, it is possible for a mutation in the ube3a gene or in the nearby region of dna that controls gene activation to be passed from one generation to the next.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by angelman syndrome ?<answer>angelman syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 12,000 to 20,000 people.<end>
<question>what is (are) angelman syndrome ?<answer>angelman syndrome is a genetic disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. characteristic features of this condition include developmental delay, intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, problems with movement and balance (ataxia), epilepsy, and a small head size. individuals with angelman syndrome typically have a happy, excitable demeanor with frequent smiling, laughter, and hand-flapping movements. many of the characteristic features of angelman syndrome result from the loss of function of a gene called ube3a. most cases of angelman syndrome are not inherited, although in rare cases a genetic change responsible for angelman syndrome can be inherited from a parent. treatment is aimed at addressing each individual's symptoms and may include antiepileptics for seizures; physical, occupational, and speech therapy; and special education services.<end>
<question>what is (are) angelman syndrome ?<answer>angelman syndrome is a complex genetic disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. characteristic features of this condition include delayed development, intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, and problems with movement and balance (ataxia). most affected children also have recurrent seizures (epilepsy) and a small head size (microcephaly). delayed development becomes noticeable by the age of 6 to 12 months, and other common signs and symptoms usually appear in early childhood. children with angelman syndrome typically have a happy, excitable demeanor with frequent smiling, laughter, and hand-flapping movements. hyperactivity, a short attention span, and a fascination with water are common. most affected children also have difficulty sleeping and need less sleep than usual. with age, people with angelman syndrome become less excitable, and the sleeping problems tend to improve. however, affected individuals continue to have intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, and seizures throughout their lives. adults with angelman syndrome have distinctive facial features that may be described as "coarse." other common features include unusually fair skin with light-colored hair and an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). the life expectancy of people with this condition appears to be nearly normal.<end>
<question>is moyamoya disease inherited ?<answer>up to 15 percent of japanese people with moyamoya disease have one or more family members with the condition, indicating that the condition can be passed through generations in families; however, the inheritance pattern is unknown. research suggests that the condition follows an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. however, some people who have a copy of the altered gene never develop the condition, which is a situation known as reduced penetrance.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by moyamoya disease ?<answer>moyamoya disease was first identified in japan, where it is most prevalent, affecting about 5 in 100,000 individuals. the condition is also relatively common in other asian populations. it is ten times less common in europe. in the united states, asian americans are four times more commonly affected than whites. for unknown reasons, moyamoya disease occurs twice as often in females as in males.<end>
<question>what is (are) moyamoya disease ?<answer>moyamoya disease is a rare, progressive, blood vessel disease caused by blocked arteries at the base of the brain in an area called the basal ganglia. the name "moyamoya" means "puff of smoke" in japanese and describes the look of the tangled vessels that form to compensate for the blockage. this condition usually affects children, but can affect adults. affected people are at increased risk for blood clots, strokes, and transient ischemic attacks (tias) which are frequently accompanied by seizures and muscular weakness, or paralysis on one side of the body. affected people may also have disturbed consciousness, speech deficits (usually aphasia), sensory and cognitive impairments, involuntary movements, and vision problems. researchers believe that moyamoya disease is an inherited condition because it tends to run in families. moyamoya syndrome is a related term that refers to cases of moyamoya disease that occur in association with other conditions or risk factors, such as neurofibromatosis, tuberculosis meningitis, sickle cell disease, leptospirosis, brain tumors, sturge-weber syndrome, and tuberous sclerosis.<end>
<question>what is (are) moyamoya disease ?<answer>moyamoya disease is a disorder of blood vessels in the brain, specifically the internal carotid arteries and the arteries that branch from them. these vessels, which provide oxygen-rich blood to the brain, narrow over time. narrowing of these vessels reduces blood flow in the brain. in an attempt to compensate, new networks of small, fragile blood vessels form. these networks, visualized by a particular test called an angiogram, resemble puffs of smoke, which is how the condition got its name: "moyamoya" is an expression meaning "something hazy like a puff of smoke" in japanese. moyamoya disease commonly begins either around age 5 or in a person's thirties or forties. a lack of blood supply to the brain leads to several symptoms of the disorder, including temporary stroke-like episodes (transient ischemic attacks), strokes, and seizures. in addition, the fragile blood vessels that grow can develop bulges (aneurysms), or they can break open, leading to bleeding (hemorrhage) in the brain. affected individuals may develop recurrent headaches, involuntary jerking movements (chorea), or a decline in thinking ability. the symptoms of moyamoya disease often worsen over time if the condition is not treated. some people have the blood vessel changes characteristic of moyamoya disease in addition to features of another disorder, such as neurofibromatosis type 1, sickle cell disease, or graves disease. these individuals are said to have moyamoya syndrome.<end>
<question>is anencephaly inherited ?<answer>most cases of anencephaly are sporadic, which means they occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. a small percentage of cases have been reported to run in families; however, the condition does not have a clear pattern of inheritance. for parents who have had a child with anencephaly, the risk of having another affected child is increased compared with the risk in the general population.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by anencephaly ?<answer>anencephaly is one of the most common types of neural tube defect, affecting about 1 in 1,000 pregnancies. however, most of these pregnancies end in miscarriage, so the prevalence of this condition in newborns is much lower. an estimated 1 in 10,000 infants in the united states is born with anencephaly.<end>
<question>what is (are) anencephaly ?<answer>anencephaly is a type of neural tube defect characterized by abnormal development of the brain and the bones of the skull. the neural tube is a narrow channel that normally folds and closes between the 3rd and 4th weeks of pregnancy, forming the brain and spinal cord of the embryo. anencephaly occurs when the 'cephalic' or head end of the neural tube fails to close, causing the absence of a major portion of the brain, skull, and scalp. infants with this disorder are born without a forebrain (the front part of the brain) and a cerebrum (the thinking and coordinating part of the brain). the remaining brain tissue is often exposed (not covered by bone or skin). affected babies are usually blind, deaf, unconscious, and unable to feel pain. almost all babies with anencephaly die before birth, although some may survive a few hours or a few days after birth. anencephaly is likely caused by an interaction between genetic and environmental factors, many of which remain unknown.<end>
<question>what is (are) anencephaly ?<answer>anencephaly is a condition that prevents the normal development of the brain and the bones of the skull. this condition results when a structure called the neural tube fails to close during the first few weeks of embryonic development. the neural tube is a layer of cells that ultimately develops into the brain and spinal cord. because anencephaly is caused by abnormalities of the neural tube, it is classified as a neural tube defect. because the neural tube fails to close properly, the developing brain and spinal cord are exposed to the amniotic fluid that surrounds the fetus in the womb. this exposure causes the nervous system tissue to break down (degenerate). as a result, people with anencephaly are missing large parts of the brain called the cerebrum and cerebellum. these brain regions are necessary for thinking, hearing, vision, emotion, and coordinating movement. the bones of the skull are also missing or incompletely formed. because these nervous system abnormalities are so severe, almost all babies with anencephaly die before birth or within a few hours or days after birth.<end>
<question>is fabry disease inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an x-linked pattern. a condition is considered x-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the x chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes in each cell. in males (who have only one x chromosome), one altered copy of the gla gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. because females have two copies of the x chromosome, one altered copy of the gene in each cell usually leads to less severe symptoms in females than in males, or rarely may cause no symptoms at all. unlike other x-linked disorders, fabry disease causes significant medical problems in many females who have one altered copy of the gla gene. these women may experience many of the classic features of the disorder, including nervous system abnormalities, kidney problems, chronic pain, and fatigue. they also have an increased risk of developing high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, and kidney failure. the signs and symptoms of fabry disease usually begin later in life and are milder in females than in their affected male relatives. a small percentage of females who carry a mutation in one copy of the gla gene never develop signs and symptoms of fabry disease.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by fabry disease ?<answer>fabry disease affects an estimated 1 in 40,000 to 60,000 males. this disorder also occurs in females, although the prevalence is unknown. milder, late-onset forms of the disorder are probably more common than the classic, severe form.<end>
<question>what is (are) fabry disease ?<answer>fabry disease is an inherited disorder that results from the buildup of a particular type of fat in the body's cells, called globotriaosylceramide or gl-3. fabry disease affects many parts of the body. signs and symptoms may include episodes of pain, particularly in the hands and feet (acroparesthesias); clusters of small, dark red spots on the skin called angiokeratomas; a decreased ability to sweat (hypohidrosis); cloudiness of the front part of the eye (corneal opacity); and hearing loss. potentially severe complications can include progressive kidney damage, heart attack, and stroke. milder forms of the disorder may appear later in life and affect only the heart or kidneys. fabry disease is caused by mutations in the gla gene and is inherited in an x-linked manner. treatment may include enzyme replacement therapy (ert); pain medications, ace inhibitors; and chronic hemodialysis or renal transplantation for end stage renal disease.<end>
<question>what is (are) fabry disease ?<answer>fabry disease is an inherited disorder that results from the buildup of a particular type of fat, called globotriaosylceramide, in the body's cells. beginning in childhood, this buildup causes signs and symptoms that affect many parts of the body. characteristic features of fabry disease include episodes of pain, particularly in the hands and feet (acroparesthesias); clusters of small, dark red spots on the skin called angiokeratomas; a decreased ability to sweat (hypohidrosis); cloudiness of the front part of the eye (corneal opacity); problems with the gastrointestinal system; ringing in the ears (tinnitus); and hearing loss. fabry disease also involves potentially life-threatening complications such as progressive kidney damage, heart attack, and stroke. some affected individuals have milder forms of the disorder that appear later in life and affect only the heart or kidneys.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of surviving cancer ?<answer>some signs that may indicate you need professional help for depression include - feelings of worry, sadness, and hopelessness that don't go away - feeling overwhelmed or out of control for long periods of time - crying for a long time or many times a day - thinking about hurting or killing yourself - loss of interest in usual activities. feelings of worry, sadness, and hopelessness that don't go away feeling overwhelmed or out of control for long periods of time crying for a long time or many times a day thinking about hurting or killing yourself loss of interest in usual activities.<end>
<question>what is (are) surviving cancer ?<answer>bladder and bowel problems are among the most upsetting issues people face after cancer treatment. people often feel ashamed or fearful to go out in public, because they worry about having an "accident." this loss of control can happen after treatment for bladder, prostate, colon, rectal, ovarian, or other gynecologic or abdominal cancers. some surgeries to treat cancer may leave a patient with little or no bladder or bowel control. the opposite problem can happen with some medicines that cause constipation. for some people the problems improve over time, but others may experience long-term issues. it is very important to tell your doctor about any changes in your bladder or bowel habits. several things may help, such as medications, changes in diet or fluid intake, and exercises. joining a support group also may be helpful, especially for survivors who have an ostomy (an opening in the body to pass waste material).<end>
<question>how to diagnose surviving cancer ?<answer>older adults are more likely to have chronic health conditions such as diabetes and heart disease. managing these conditions can complicate treatment and affect the time it takes to recover. also, older people's bodies metabolize, or break down, drugs at a slower rate than younger people, and this can have an effect on the way medicines are tolerated. for instance, some older adults may not be able to tolerate high doses of chemotherapy (cancer-fighting drugs) and radiation that are used to treat cancer.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for surviving cancer ?<answer>certain kinds of chemotherapy and medicines contribute to weight gain. unfortunately, the usual ways people try to lose weight may not work. ask your doctor about talking with a nutritionist who can help you plan a healthy diet, and about doing exercises that can help you regain muscle tone.<end>
<question>is williams syndrome inherited ?<answer>most cases of williams syndrome are not inherited but occur as random events during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in a parent of an affected individual. these cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. williams syndrome is considered an autosomal dominant condition because one copy of the altered chromosome 7 in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. in a small percentage of cases, people with williams syndrome inherit the chromosomal deletion from a parent with the condition.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by williams syndrome ?<answer>williams syndrome affects an estimated 1 in 7,500 to 10,000 people.<end>
<question>what is (are) williams syndrome ?<answer>williams syndrome is a developmental disorder that affects many parts of the body. this condition is characterized by mild to moderate intellectual disability, unique personality characteristics, distinctive facial features, and heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) problems. williams syndrome is caused by missing genes from a specific region of chromosome 7. the deleted region includes more than 25 genes and researchers believe that a loss of several of these genes probably contributes to the characteristic features of this disorder. although williams syndrome is considered an autosomal dominant condition, most cases are not inherited, but occur as random events during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) in a parent of an affected individual.<end>
<question>what is (are) williams syndrome ?<answer>williams syndrome is a developmental disorder that affects many parts of the body. this condition is characterized by mild to moderate intellectual disability or learning problems, unique personality characteristics, distinctive facial features, and heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) problems. people with williams syndrome typically have difficulty with visual-spatial tasks such as drawing and assembling puzzles, but they tend to do well on tasks that involve spoken language, music, and learning by repetition (rote memorization). affected individuals have outgoing, engaging personalities and tend to take an extreme interest in other people. attention deficit disorder (add), problems with anxiety, and phobias are common among people with this disorder. young children with williams syndrome have distinctive facial features including a broad forehead, a short nose with a broad tip, full cheeks, and a wide mouth with full lips. many affected people have dental problems such as teeth that are small, widely spaced, crooked, or missing. in older children and adults, the face appears longer and more gaunt. a form of cardiovascular disease called supravalvular aortic stenosis (svas) occurs frequently in people with williams syndrome. supravalvular aortic stenosis is a narrowing of the large blood vessel that carries blood from the heart to the rest of the body (the aorta). if this condition is not treated, the aortic narrowing can lead to shortness of breath, chest pain, and heart failure. other problems with the heart and blood vessels, including high blood pressure (hypertension), have also been reported in people with williams syndrome. additional signs and symptoms of williams syndrome include abnormalities of connective tissue (tissue that supports the body's joints and organs) such as joint problems and soft, loose skin. affected people may also have increased calcium levels in the blood (hypercalcemia) in infancy, developmental delays, problems with coordination, and short stature. medical problems involving the eyes and vision, the digestive tract, and the urinary system are also possible.<end>
<question>is metachromatic leukodystrophy inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by metachromatic leukodystrophy ?<answer>metachromatic leukodystrophy is reported to occur in 1 in 40,000 to 160,000 individuals worldwide. the condition is more common in certain genetically isolated populations: 1 in 75 in a small group of jews who immigrated to israel from southern arabia (habbanites), 1 in 2,500 in the western portion of the navajo nation, and 1 in 8,000 among arab groups in israel.<end>
<question>what is (are) metachromatic leukodystrophy ?<answer>metachromatic leukodystrophy is an inherited condition characterized by the accumulation of fats called sulfatides in cells, especially cells of the nervous system. this accumulation results in progressive destruction of white matter of the brain, which consists of nerve fibers covered by myelin. affected individuals experience progressive deterioration of intellectual functions and motor skills, such as the ability to walk. they also develop loss of sensation in the extremities, incontinence, seizures, paralysis, inability to speak, blindness, and hearing loss. eventually they lose awareness of their surroundings and become unresponsive. this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and is caused by mutations in the arsa and psap genes.<end>
<question>what is (are) metachromatic leukodystrophy ?<answer>metachromatic leukodystrophy is an inherited disorder characterized by the accumulation of fats called sulfatides in cells. this accumulation especially affects cells in the nervous system that produce myelin, the substance that insulates and protects nerves. nerve cells covered by myelin make up a tissue called white matter. sulfatide accumulation in myelin-producing cells causes progressive destruction of white matter (leukodystrophy) throughout the nervous system, including in the brain and spinal cord (the central nervous system) and the nerves connecting the brain and spinal cord to muscles and sensory cells that detect sensations such as touch, pain, heat, and sound (the peripheral nervous system). in people with metachromatic leukodystrophy, white matter damage causes progressive deterioration of intellectual functions and motor skills, such as the ability to walk. affected individuals also develop loss of sensation in the extremities (peripheral neuropathy), incontinence, seizures, paralysis, an inability to speak, blindness, and hearing loss. eventually they lose awareness of their surroundings and become unresponsive. while neurological problems are the primary feature of metachromatic leukodystrophy, effects of sulfatide accumulation on other organs and tissues have been reported, most often involving the gallbladder. the most common form of metachromatic leukodystrophy, affecting about 50 to 60 percent of all individuals with this disorder, is called the late infantile form. this form of the disorder usually appears in the second year of life. affected children lose any speech they have developed, become weak, and develop problems with walking (gait disturbance). as the disorder worsens, muscle tone generally first decreases, and then increases to the point of rigidity. individuals with the late infantile form of metachromatic leukodystrophy typically do not survive past childhood. in 20 to 30 percent of individuals with metachromatic leukodystrophy, onset occurs between the age of 4 and adolescence. in this juvenile form, the first signs of the disorder may be behavioral problems and increasing difficulty with schoolwork. progression of the disorder is slower than in the late infantile form, and affected individuals may survive for about 20 years after diagnosis. the adult form of metachromatic leukodystrophy affects approximately 15 to 20 percent of individuals with the disorder. in this form, the first symptoms appear during the teenage years or later. often behavioral problems such as alcoholism, drug abuse, or difficulties at school or work are the first symptoms to appear. the affected individual may experience psychiatric symptoms such as delusions or hallucinations. people with the adult form of metachromatic leukodystrophy may survive for 20 to 30 years after diagnosis. during this time there may be some periods of relative stability and other periods of more rapid decline. metachromatic leukodystrophy gets its name from the way cells with an accumulation of sulfatides appear when viewed under a microscope. the sulfatides form granules that are described as metachromatic, which means they pick up color differently than surrounding cellular material when stained for examination.<end>
<question>what is (are) anxiety disorders ?<answer>cognitive behavioral therapy (cbt) is a type of psychotherapy that is very useful in treating anxiety disorders. it can help people change the thinking patterns that support their fears and change the way they react to anxiety-provoking situations. for example, cognitive behavioral therapy can help people with panic disorder learn that their panic attacks are not really heart attacks and help people with social phobia learn how to overcome the belief that others are always watching and judging them. when people are ready to confront their fears, they are shown how to use exposure techniques to desensitize themselves to situations that trigger their anxieties.<end>
<question>who is at risk for anxiety disorders? ?<answer>generalized anxiety disorder (gad) affects about 6.8 million american adults, including twice as many women as men. the disorder develops gradually and can begin at any point in the life cycle, although the years of highest risk are between childhood and middle age. the average age of onset is 31 years old. social phobia affects about 15 million american adults. women and men are equally likely to develop the disorder, which usually begins in childhood or early adolescence. there is some evidence that genetic factors are involved. panic disorder affects about 6 million american adults and is twice as common in women as men. panic attacks often begin in late adolescence or early adulthood, but not everyone who experiences panic attacks will develop panic disorder. many people have just one attack and never have another. the tendency to develop panic attacks appears to be inherited.<end>
<question>what is (are) anxiety disorders ?<answer>occasional anxiety is a normal part of life. you might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or making an important decision. however, anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. for a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. these feelings can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships. (watch the video to learn about the types of anxiety disorders. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) anxiety disorders in older adults studies estimate that anxiety disorders affect up to 15 percent of older adults in a given year. more women than men experience anxiety disorders. they tend to be less common among older adults than younger adults. but developing an anxiety disorder late in life is not a normal part of aging. anxiety disorders commonly occur along with other mental or physical illnesses, including alcohol or substance abuse, which may mask anxiety symptoms or make them worse. in older adults, anxiety disorders often occur at the same time as depression, heart disease, diabetes, and other medical problems. in some cases, these other problems need to be treated before a person can respond well to treatment for anxiety. there are three types of anxiety disorders discussed here. - generalized anxiety disorder - social phobia - panic disorder generalized anxiety disorder social phobia panic disorder generalized anxiety disorder (gad) all of us worry about things like health, money, or family problems. but people with generalized anxiety disorder (gad) are extremely worried about these and many other things, even when there is little or no reason to worry about them. they are very anxious about just getting through the day. they think things will always go badly. at times, worrying keeps people with gad from doing everyday tasks. learn more about generalized anxiety disorder (gad). social phobia in social phobia, a person fears being judged by others or of being embarrassed. this fear can get in the way of doing everyday things such as going to work, running errands, or meeting with friends. people who have social phobia often know that they shouldn't be so afraid, but they can't control their fear. learn more about social phobia. panic disorder in panic disorder, a person has sudden, unexplained attacks of terror, and often feels his or her heart pounding. during a panic attack, a person feels a sense of unreality, a fear of impending doom, or a fear of losing control. panic attacks can occur at any time. learn more about panic disorder. anxiety disorders are treatable in general, anxiety disorders are treated with medication, specific types of psychotherapy, or both. treatment choices depend on the type of disorder, the persons preference, and the expertise of the doctor. if you think you have an anxiety disorder, talk to your doctor.<end>
<question>what is (are) anxiety disorders ?<answer>in panic disorder, a person has sudden, unexplained attacks of terror, and often feels his or her heart pounding. during a panic attack, a person feels a sense of unreality, a fear of impending doom, or a fear of losing control. panic attacks can occur at any time. people with panic disorder may have - sudden and repeated attacks of fear - a feeling of being out of control during a panic attack - an intense worry about when the next attack will happen - a fear or avoidance of places where panic attacks have occurred in the past - physical symptoms during an attack, such as a pounding or racing heart, sweating, breathing problems, weakness or dizziness, feeling hot or a cold chill, tingly or numb hands, chest pain, or stomach pain. sudden and repeated attacks of fear a feeling of being out of control during a panic attack an intense worry about when the next attack will happen a fear or avoidance of places where panic attacks have occurred in the past physical symptoms during an attack, such as a pounding or racing heart, sweating, breathing problems, weakness or dizziness, feeling hot or a cold chill, tingly or numb hands, chest pain, or stomach pain. learn more about panic disorder.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for primary sclerosing cholangitis ?<answer>although researchers have studied many treatments, none has been shown to cure or slow the progress of psc. treatment of psc aims to relieve symptoms and manage complications. medical treatment may include various medications to relieve itching, antibiotics to treat infections, and vitamin supplements. instruments passed through an endoscope during ercp can help open blocked bile ducts. liver transplantation may be an option if the liver begins to fail.<end>
<question>what are the complications of primary sclerosing cholangitis ?<answer>psc can lead to various complications, including - deficiencies of vitamins a, d, e, and k - infections of the bile ducts - cirrhosisextensive scarring of the liver - liver failure - bile duct cancer<end>
<question>what is (are) primary sclerosing cholangitis ?<answer>primary sclerosing cholangitis is a condition that affects the bile ducts. these ducts carry bile (a fluid that helps to digest fats) from the liver, where bile is produced, to the gallbladder, where it is stored, and to the small intestine, where it aids in digestion. primary sclerosing cholangitis occurs because of inflammation in the bile ducts (cholangitis) that leads to scarring (sclerosis) and narrowing of the ducts. as a result, bile cannot be released to the gallbladder and small intestine, and it builds up in the liver. primary sclerosing cholangitis is usually diagnosed around age 40, and for unknown reasons, it affects men twice as often as women. many people have no signs or symptoms of the condition when they are diagnosed, but routine blood tests reveal liver problems. when apparent, the earliest signs and symptoms of primary sclerosing cholangitis include extreme tiredness (fatigue), discomfort in the abdomen, and severe itchiness (pruritus). as the condition worsens, affected individuals may develop yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) and an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). eventually, the buildup of bile damages the liver cells, causing chronic liver disease (cirrhosis) and liver failure. without bile available to digest them, fats pass through the body. as a result, weight loss and shortages of vitamins that are absorbed with and stored in fats (fat-soluble vitamins) can occur. a fat-soluble vitamin called vitamin d helps absorb calcium and helps bones harden, and lack of this vitamin can cause thinning of the bones (osteoporosis) in people with primary sclerosing cholangitis. primary sclerosing cholangitis is often associated with another condition called inflammatory bowel disease, which is characterized by inflammation of the intestines that causes open sores (ulcers) in the intestines and abdominal pain. however, the reason for this link is unclear. approximately 70 percent of people with primary sclerosing cholangitis have inflammatory bowel disease, most commonly a form of the condition known as ulcerative colitis. in addition, people with primary sclerosing cholangitis are more likely to have an autoimmune disorder, such as type 1 diabetes, celiac disease, or thyroid disease, than people without the condition. autoimmune disorders occur when the immune system malfunctions and attacks the body's tissues and organs. people with primary sclerosing cholangitis also have an increased risk of developing cancer, particularly cancer of the bile ducts (cholangiocarcinoma).<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of primary sclerosing cholangitis ?<answer>the main symptoms of psc are itching, fatigue, and yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes. an infection in the bile ducts can cause chills and fever. psc progresses slowly, so a person can have the disease for years before symptoms develop.<end>
<question>is joubert syndrome inherited ?<answer>joubert syndrome typically has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, which means both copies of a gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they usually do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. rare cases of joubert syndrome are inherited in an x-linked recessive pattern. in these cases, the causative gene is located on the x chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. in males (who have only one x chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. in females (who have two x chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by x-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. a characteristic of x-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass x-linked traits to their sons.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by joubert syndrome ?<answer>joubert syndrome is estimated to affect between 1 in 80,000 and 1 in 100,000 newborns. however, this estimate may be too low because joubert syndrome has such a large range of possible features and is likely underdiagnosed.<end>
<question>what is (are) joubert syndrome ?<answer>joubert syndrome is disorder of abnormal brain development that may affect many parts of the body. it is characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of the cerebellar vermis (a part of the brain that controls balance and coordination) and a malformed brain stem (connection between the brain and spinal cord). this gives a characteristic appearance of a molar tooth sign on mri. signs and symptoms can vary but commonly include weak muscle tone (hypotonia); abnormal breathing patterns; abnormal eye movements; ataxia; distinctive facial features; and intellectual disability. various other abnormalities may also be present. joubert syndrome may be caused by mutations in any of many genes and is predominantly inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. rarely it may be inherited in an x-linked recessive manner. treatment is supportive and depends on the symptoms in each person.<end>
<question>what is (are) joubert syndrome ?<answer>joubert syndrome is a disorder that affects many parts of the body. the signs and symptoms of this condition vary among affected individuals, even among members of the same family. the hallmark feature of joubert syndrome is a brain abnormality called the molar tooth sign, which can be seen on brain imaging studies such as magnetic resonance imaging (mri). this sign results from the abnormal development of regions near the back of the brain called the cerebellar vermis and the brainstem. the molar tooth sign got its name because the characteristic brain abnormalities resemble the cross-section of a molar tooth when seen on an mri. most infants with joubert syndrome have weak muscle tone (hypotonia) in infancy, which evolves into difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia) in early childhood. other characteristic features of the condition include episodes of unusually fast or slow breathing in infancy and abnormal eye movements. most affected individuals have delayed development and intellectual disability, which range from mild to severe. distinctive facial features are also characteristic of joubert syndrome; these include a broad forehead, arched eyebrows, droopy eyelids (ptosis), widely spaced eyes, low-set ears, and a triangle-shaped mouth. joubert syndrome can include a broad range of additional signs and symptoms. the condition is sometimes associated with other eye abnormalities (such as retinal dystrophy, which can cause vision loss), kidney disease, liver disease, skeletal abnormalities (such as the presence of extra fingers and toes), and hormone (endocrine) problems. when the characteristic features of joubert syndrome occur in combination with one or more of these additional signs and symptoms, researchers refer to the condition as "joubert syndrome and related disorders (jsrd)."<end>
<question>is kawasaki disease inherited ?<answer>a predisposition to kawasaki disease appears to be passed through generations in families, but the inheritance pattern is unknown. children of parents who have had kawasaki disease have twice the risk of developing the disorder compared to the general population. children with affected siblings have a tenfold higher risk.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by kawasaki disease ?<answer>in the united states and other western countries, kawasaki disease occurs in approximately 1 in 10,000 children under 5 each year. the condition is 10 to 20 times more common in east asia, including japan, korea, and taiwan.<end>
<question>what is (are) kawasaki disease ?<answer>kawasaki disease is a rare childhood disease. it makes the walls of the blood vessels in the body become inflamed. it can affect any type of blood vessel, including the arteries, veins, and capillaries. no one knows what causes kawasaki disease. symptoms include - high fever that lasts longer than 5 days - swollen lymph nodes in the neck - a rash on the mid-section and genital area - red, dry, cracked lips and a red, swollen tongue - red, swollen palms of the hands and soles of the feet - redness of the eyes kawasaki disease can't be passed from one child to another. there is no single test. to diagnose it, doctors look at the signs and symptoms. they may also use an echocardiogram or other tests. it is mainly treated with medicines. rarely, medical procedures and surgery also may be used for children whose coronary arteries are affected. kawasaki disease can't be prevented. however, most children who develop the disease fully recover - usually within weeks of getting signs and symptoms. further problems are rare. nih: national heart, lung, and blood institute<end>
<question>what is (are) kawasaki disease ?<answer>kawasaki disease is a sudden and time-limited (acute) illness that affects infants and young children. affected children develop a prolonged fever lasting several days, a skin rash, and swollen lymph nodes in the neck (cervical lymphadenopathy). they also develop redness in the whites of the eyes (conjunctivitis) and redness (erythema) of the lips, lining of the mouth (oral mucosa), tongue, palms of the hands, and soles of the feet. without treatment, 15 to 25 percent of individuals with kawasaki disease develop bulging and thinning of the walls of the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle (coronary artery aneurysms) or other damage to the coronary arteries, which can be life-threatening.<end>
<question>what to do for urinary tract infections in children ?<answer>children with a uti should drink as much as they wish and not be forced to drink large amounts of fluid. the health care provider needs to know if a child is not interested in drinking or is unable to drink.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for urinary tract infections in children ?<answer>some abnormalities in the urinary tract correct themselves as the child grows, but some may require surgical correction. while milder forms of vur may resolve on their own, one common procedure to correct vur is the reimplantation of the ureters. during this procedure, the surgeon repositions the connection between the ureters and the bladder so that urine will not reflux into the ureters and kidneys. this procedure may be performed through an incision that gives the surgeon a direct view of the bladder and ureters or laparoscopically. laparoscopy is a procedure that uses a scope inserted through a small incision. in recent years, health care providers have treated some cases of vur by injecting substances into the bladder wall, just below the opening where the ureter joins the bladder. this injection creates a kind of narrowing or valve that keeps urine from refluxing into the ureters. the injection is delivered to the inside of the bladder through a catheter passed through the urethra, so there is no surgical incision. evidence of clinically significant obstruction may indicate the need for surgery.<end>
<question>what is (are) urinary tract infections in children ?<answer>a uti is an infection in the urinary tract. infections are caused by microbesorganisms too small to be seen without a microscopeincluding fungi, viruses, and bacteria. bacteria are the most common cause of utis. normally, bacteria that enter the urinary tract are rapidly removed by the body before they cause symptoms. however, sometimes bacteria overcome the bodys natural defenses and cause infection. an infection in the urethra is called urethritis. a bladder infection is called cystitis. bacteria may travel up the ureters to multiply and infect the kidneys. a kidney infection is called pyelonephritis.<end>
<question>how to diagnose urinary tract infections in children ?<answer>once the infection has cleared, more tests may be recommended to check for abnormalities in the urinary tract. repeated infections in an abnormal urinary tract may cause kidney damage. the kinds of tests ordered will depend on the child and the type of urinary infection. because no single test can tell everything about the urinary tract that might be important, more than one of the tests listed below may be needed. - kidney and bladder ultrasound. ultrasound uses a device, called a transducer, that bounces safe, painless sound waves off organs to create an image of their structure. the procedure is performed in a health care providers office, outpatient center, or hospital by a specially trained technician, and the images are interpreted by a radiologista doctor who specializes in medical imaging; anesthesia is not needed. the images can show certain abnormalities in the kidneys and bladder. however, this test cannot reveal all important urinary abnormalities or measure how well the kidneys work. - voiding cystourethrogram. this test is an x-ray image of the bladder and urethra taken while the bladder is full and during urination, also called voiding. the childs bladder and urethra are filled with a special dye, called contrast medium, to make the structures clearly visible on the x-ray images. the x-ray machine captures images of the contrast medium while the bladder is full and when the child urinates. the procedure is performed in a health care providers office, outpatient center, or hospital by an x-ray technician supervised by a radiologist, who then interprets the images. anesthesia is not needed, but sedation may be used for some children. this test can show abnormalities of the inside of the urethra and bladder. the test can also determine whether the flow of urine is normal when the bladder empties. - computerized tomography (ct) scan. ct scans use a combination of x rays and computer technology to create three-dimensional (3-d) images. a ct scan may include the injection of contrast medium. ct scans require the child to lie on a table that slides into a tunnel-shaped device where the x rays are taken. the procedure is performed in an outpatient center or hospital by an x-ray technician, and the images are interpreted by a radiologist; anesthesia is not needed. ct scans can provide clearer, more detailed images to help the health care provider understand the problem. - magnetic resonance imaging (mri). mri machines use radio waves and magnets to produce detailed pictures of the bodys internal organs and soft tissues without using x rays. an mri may include the injection of contrast medium. with most mri machines, the child lies on a table that slides into a tunnel-shaped device that may be open ended or closed at one end; some newer machines are designed to allow the child to lie in a more open space. the procedure is performed in an outpatient center or hospital by a specially trained technician, and the images are interpreted by a radiologist; anesthesia is not needed, though light sedation may be used for children with a fear of confined spaces. like ct scans, mris can provide clearer, more detailed images. - radionuclide scan. a radionuclide scan is an imaging technique that relies on the detection of small amounts of radiation after injection of radioactive chemicals. because the dose of the radioactive chemicals is small, the risk of causing damage to cells is low. special cameras and computers are used to create images of the radioactive chemicals as they pass through the kidneys. radionuclide scans are performed in a health care providers office, outpatient center, or hospital by a specially trained technician, and the images are interpreted by a radiologist; anesthesia is not needed. radioactive chemicals injected into the blood can provide information about kidney function. radioactive chemicals can also be put into the fluids used to fill the bladder and urethra for x ray, mri, and ct imaging. radionuclide scans expose a child to about the same amount or less of radiation as a conventional x ray. - urodynamics. urodynamic testing is any procedure that looks at how well the bladder, sphincters, and urethra are storing and releasing urine. most of these tests are performed in the office of a urologista doctor who specializes in urinary problemsby a urologist, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner. some procedures may require light sedation to keep the child calm. most urodynamic tests focus on the bladders ability to hold urine and empty steadily and completely. urodynamic tests can also show whether the bladder is having abnormal contractions that cause leakage. a health care provider may order these tests if there is evidence that the child has some kind of nerve damage or dysfunctional voidingunhealthy urination habits such as holding in urine when the bladder is full.<end>
<question>what is the outlook for pituitary tumors ?<answer>if diagnosed early enough, the prognosis is usually excellent. if diagnosis is delayed, even a non-functioning tumor can cause problems if it grows large enough to press on the optic nerves, the brain, or the carotid arteries (the vessels that bring blood to the brain). early diagnosis and treatment is the key to a good prognosis.<end>
<question>what is (are) pituitary tumors ?<answer>the pituitary is a small, bean-sized gland that is below the hypothalamus, a structure at the base of the brain, by a thread-like stalk that contains both blood vessels and nerves. it controls a system of hormones in the body that regulate growth, metabolism, the stress response, and functions of the sex organs via the thyroid gland, adrenal gland, ovaries, and testes. a pituitary tumor is an abnormal growth of cells within the pituitary gland. most pituitary tumors are benign, which means they are non-cancerous, grow slowly and do not spread to other parts of the body; however they can make the pituitary gland produce either too many or too few hormones, which can cause problems in the body. tumors that make hormones are called functioning tumors, and they can cause a wide array of symptoms depending upon the hormone affected. tumors that dont make hormones are called non-functioning tumors. their symptoms are directly related to their growth in size and include headaches, vision problems, nausea, and vomiting. diseases related to hormone abnormalities include cushings disease, in which fat builds up in the face, back and chest, and the arms and legs become very thin; and acromegaly, a condition in which the hands, feet, and face are larger than normal. pituitary hormones that impact the sex hormones, such as estrogen and testosterone, can make a woman produce breast milk even though she is not pregnant or nursing, or cause a man to lose his sex drive or lower his sperm count. pituitary tumors often go undiagnosed because their symptoms resemble those of so many other more common diseases.<end>
<question>what is (are) pituitary tumors ?<answer>key points - a pituitary tumor is a growth of abnormal cells in the tissues of the pituitary gland. - the pituitary gland hormones control many other glands in the body. - having certain genetic conditions increases the risk of developing a pituitary tumor. - signs of a pituitary tumor include problems with vision and certain physical changes. - imaging studies and tests that examine the blood and urine are used to detect (find) and diagnose a pituitary tumor. - certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options. a pituitary tumor is a growth of abnormal cells in the tissues of the pituitary gland. pituitary tumors form in the pituitary gland, a pea-sized organ in the center of the brain, just above the back of the nose. the pituitary gland is sometimes called the "master endocrine gland" because it makes hormones that affect the way many parts of the body work. it also controls hormones made by many other glands in the body. pituitary tumors are divided into three groups: - benign pituitary adenomas: tumors that are not cancer. these tumors grow very slowly and do not spread from the pituitary gland to other parts of the body. - invasive pituitary adenomas: benign tumors that may spread to bones of the skull or the sinus cavity below the pituitary gland. - pituitary carcinomas: tumors that are malignant (cancer). these pituitary tumors spread into other areas of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) or outside of the central nervous system. very few pituitary tumors are malignant. pituitary tumors may be either non-functioning or functioning. - non-functioning pituitary tumors do not make extra amounts of hormones. - functioning pituitary tumors make more than the normal amount of one or more hormones. most pituitary tumors are functioning tumors. the extra hormones made by pituitary tumors may cause certain signs or symptoms of disease. the pituitary gland hormones control many other glands in the body. hormones made by the pituitary gland include: - prolactin: a hormone that causes a womans breasts to make milk during and after pregnancy. - adrenocorticotropic hormone (acth): a hormone that causes the adrenal glands to make a hormone called cortisol. cortisol helps control the use of sugar, protein, and fats in the body and helps the body deal with stress. - growth hormone: a hormone that helps control body growth and the use of sugar and fat in the body. growth hormone is also called somatotropin. - thyroid-stimulating hormone: a hormone that causes the thyroid gland to make other hormones that control growth, body temperature, and heart rate. thyroid-stimulating hormone is also called thyrotropin. - luteinizing hormone (lh) and follicle-stimulating hormone (fsh): hormones that control the menstrual cycle in women and the making of sperm in men.<end>
<question>what is (are) pituitary tumors ?<answer>your pituitary gland is a pea-sized gland at the base of your brain. the pituitary is the "master control gland" - it makes hormones that affect growth and the functions of other glands in the body. pituitary tumors are common, but often they don't cause health problems. most people with pituitary tumors never even know they have them. the most common type of pituitary tumor produces hormones and disrupts the balance of hormones in your body. this can cause endocrine diseases such as cushing's syndrome and hyperthyroidism. symptoms of pituitary tumors include - headaches - vision problems - nausea and vomiting - problems caused by the production of too many hormones pituitary tumors are usually curable. treatment is often surgery to remove the tumor. other options include medicines, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy.<end>
<question>what to do for intestinal pseudo-obstruction ?<answer>researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing intestinal pseudo-obstruction. following special diets usually does not help improve the disorder. however, eating frequent, small meals with pureed foods or liquids may ease digestion. vitamin and trace mineral supplements may help a person who is malnourished.<end>
<question>how to diagnose intestinal pseudo-obstruction ?<answer>to diagnose intestinal pseudo-obstruction, a health care provider may suggest the person consult a gastroenterologista doctor who specializes in digestive diseases. a health care provider will perform a physical exam; take a complete medical history, imaging studies, and a biopsy; and perform blood tests. a health care provider may order other tests to confirm the diagnosis. the health care provider also will look for the cause of the condition, such as an underlying illness. intestinal pseudo-obstruction can be difficult to diagnose, especially primary intestinal pseudo-obstruction. as a result, a correct diagnosis may take a long time. physical exam a physical exam is one of the first things a health care provider may do to help diagnose intestinal pseudo-obstruction. during a physical exam, a health care provider usually - examines a persons body - uses a stethoscope to listen to bodily sounds - taps on specific areas of the persons body medical history the health care provider will ask a person to provide a medical and family history to help diagnose intestinal pseudo-obstruction. imaging studies a health care provider may order the following imaging studies: - abdominal x ray. an x ray is a picture recorded on film or a computer that a technician takes using low-level radiation. the amount of radiation used is small. an x-ray technician takes the x ray at a hospital or an outpatient center, and a radiologista doctor who specializes in medical imaginginterprets the images. a person does not need anesthesia. the person will lie on a table or stand during the x ray. the technician positions the x-ray machine over the abdominal area. the person will hold his or her breath as the technician takes the picture so that the picture will not be blurry. the technician may ask the person to change position for additional pictures. an x ray of the abdominal area will show whether symptoms are due to an intestinal blockage. - upper gi series. a health care provider may order an upper gi series to look at the small intestine. an x-ray technician performs the test at a hospital or an outpatient center, and a radiologist interprets the images; the health care provider may give infants and children anesthesia. a person should not eat or drink for 8 hours before the procedure, if possible. during the procedure, the person will stand or sit in front of an x-ray machine and drink barium, a chalky liquid. infants lie on a table and the technician will give them barium through a tiny tube placed in the nose that runs into the stomach. barium coats the lining of the small intestine, making signs of obstruction show up more clearly on x rays. a person may experience bloating and nausea for a short time after the test. barium liquid in the gi tract causes stools to be white or light colored for several days or longer in people with intestinal pseudo-obstruction. a health care provider will give the person specific instructions about eating and drinking after the test. - lower gi series. a health care provider may order a lower gi series, an x-ray exam to look at the large intestine. an x-ray technician performs the test at a hospital or an outpatient center, and a radiologist interprets the images. a person does not need anesthesia. the health care provider may provide written bowel prep instructions to follow at home before the test. the health care provider may ask the person to follow a clear liquid diet for 1 to 3 days before the procedure. a person may need to use a laxative or an enema before the test. a laxative is medication that loosens stool and increases bowel movements. an enema involves flushing water or laxative into the anus using a special squirt bottle. for the test, the person will lie on a table while the health care provider inserts a flexible tube into the persons anus. the health care provider will fill the large intestine with barium, making signs of underlying problems show up more clearly on x rays. the test can show problems with the large intestine that are causing the persons symptoms. barium liquid in the gi tract causes stools to be white or light colored for several days or longer in people with intestinal pseudo-obstruction. enemas and repeated bowel movements may cause anal soreness. a health care provider will provide specific instructions about eating and drinking after the test. - computerized tomography (ct) scan. ct scans use a combination of x rays and computer technology to create images. an x-ray technician performs the test at a hospital or an outpatient center, and a radiologist interprets the images. for a ct scan, a health care provider may give the person a solution to drink and an injection of a special dye, called contrast medium. ct scans require the person to lie on a table that slides into a tunnel-shaped device where the technician takes the x rays. ct scans can show both the internal and external intestinal wall. the health care provider may give children a sedative to help them fall asleep for the test. - upper gi endoscopy. this procedure involves using an endoscopea small, flexible tube with a lightto see the upper gi tract, which includes the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum. a gastroenterologist performs the test at a hospital or an outpatient center. the gastroenterologist carefully feeds the endoscope down the esophagus and into the stomach and duodenum. a small camera mounted on the endoscope transmits a video image to a monitor, allowing close examination of the intestinal lining. a health care provider may give a person a liquid anesthetic to gargle or may spray anesthetic on the back of the persons throat. a health care provider will place an intravenous (iv) needle in a vein in the arm to administer sedation. sedatives help patients stay relaxed and comfortable. this test can show blockages or other conditions in the upper small intestine. a gastroenterologist may obtain a biopsy of the lining of the small intestine during an upper gi endoscopy. biopsy a gastroenterologist can obtain a biopsy of the intestinal wall during endoscopy or during surgery, if the person has surgery for intestinal pseudo-obstruction and the cause is unknown. if the health care provider needs to examine the nerves in the intestinal wall, a deeper biopsy, which a gastroenterologist can typically obtain only during surgery, is necessary. a biopsy is a procedure that involves taking a piece of the intestinal wall tissue for examination with a microscope. a health care provider performs the biopsy in a hospital and uses light sedation and local anesthetic; the health care provider uses general anesthesia if performing the biopsy during surgery. a pathologista doctor who specializes in diagnosing diseasesexamines the intestinal tissue in a lab. diagnosing problems in the nerve pathways of the intestinal tissue requires special techniques that are not widely available. a health care provider can also use a biopsy obtained during endoscopy to rule out celiac disease. celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder in which people cannot tolerate gluten because it damages the lining of their small intestine and prevents absorption of nutrients. gluten is a protein found in wheat, rye, and barley and in products such as vitamin and nutrient supplements, lip balms, and certain medications. blood tests a blood test involves drawing blood at a health care providers office or a commercial facility and sending the sample to a lab for analysis. the blood test can show the presence of other diseases or conditions that may be causing a persons symptoms. the blood test also can show levels of essential vitamins and minerals to help detect malnutrition. manometry manometry is a test that measures muscle pressure and movements in the gi tract, such as how well the smooth muscles of the stomach and small intestine contract and relax. a gastroenterologist performs the test at a hospital or an outpatient center. while the person is under sedation, a health care provider places a thin tube, or manometry tube, into the stomach and moves it down into the small intestine. a gastroenterologist may use an endoscope to place this tube. a health care provider will move the person to a manometry room and connect the manometry tube to a computer. when the person wakes up from sedation, the computer records the pressure inside the intestine while the person is fasting and after the person has eaten a meal. manometry can confirm the diagnosis of intestinal pseudo-obstruction and show the extent of the condition. gastric emptying tests gastric emptying tests can show if a disorder called gastroparesis is causing a persons symptoms. people with gastroparesis, which literally refers to a paralyzed stomach, have severely delayed gastric emptying, or the delayed movement of food from the stomach to the small intestine. some patients with intestinal pseudo-obstruction also have gastroparesis. types of gastric emptying tests include the following: - gastric emptying scintigraphy. this test involves eating a bland mealsuch as eggs or an egg substitutethat contains a small amount of radioactive material. a specially trained technician performs the test in a radiology center or hospital, and a radiologist interprets the results; the person does not need anesthesia. an external camera scans the abdomen to show where the radioactive material is located. the radiologist is then able to measure the rate of gastric emptying at 1, 2, 3, and 4 hours after the meal. normal values depend on the composition of the meal. with some meals, if more than 10 percent of the meal is still in the stomach at 4 hours, a health care provider confirms the diagnosis of gastroparesis. obtaining scans for 4 hours after the meal is essential. when the technician only obtains scans 1 to 2 hours after the meal, the results are often unreliable. - breath test. with this test, the person eats a meal containing a small amount of nonradioactive material. then, the health care provider takes breath samples over a period of several hours to measure the amount of nonradioactive material in the exhaled breath. the results allow the health care provider to calculate how fast the stomach is emptying. - smartpill. the smartpill is a small electronic device in capsule form. the smartpill test is available at specialized outpatient centers. the person swallows the device so that it can move through the entire digestive tract and send information to a cell-phone-sized receiver worn around the persons waist or neck. the recorded information provides details about how quickly food travels through each part of the digestive tract.<end>
<question>what is (are) intestinal pseudo-obstruction ?<answer>intestinal pseudo-obstruction is a digestive disorder in which the intestinal walls are unable to contract normally (called hypomotility); the condition resembles a true obstruction, but no actual blockage exists. signs and symptoms may include abdominal pain; vomiting; diarrhea; constipation; malabsorption of nutrients leading to weight loss and/or failure to thrive; and other symptoms. it may be classified as neuropathic (from lack of nerve function) or myopathic (from lack of muscle function), depending on the source of the abnormality. the condition is sometimes inherited (in an x-linked recessive or autosomal dominant manner) and may be caused by mutations in the flna gene; it may also be acquired after certain illnesses. the goal of treatment is to provide relief from symptoms and ensure that nutritional support is adequate.<end>
<question>what are the symptoms of intestinal pseudo-obstruction ?<answer>intestinal pseudo-obstruction symptoms may include - abdominal swelling or bloating, also called distension - abdominal pain - nausea - vomiting - constipation - diarrhea over time, the condition can cause malnutrition, bacterial overgrowth in the intestines, and weight loss. malnutrition is a condition that develops when the body does not get the right amount of the vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients it needs to maintain healthy tissues and organ function. some people develop problems with their esophagus, stomach, or bladder.<end>
<question>what to do for amyloidosis and kidney disease ?<answer>- amyloidosis is a rare disease that occurs when amyloid proteins are deposited in tissues and organs. - primary amyloidosis and dialysis-related amyloidosis are the types of amyloidosis that can affect the kidneys. - the most common sign of primary amyloidosis of the kidneys is nephrotic syndrome. - the signs of nephrotic syndrome include - albuminuriaan elevated amount of albumin in the urine. a person with nephrotic syndrome excretes more than half a teaspoon of albumin per day. - hyperlipidemiaa condition in which a persons blood has more-than-normal amounts of fats and cholesterol. - edemaswelling, typically in a persons legs, feet, or ankles and less often in the hands or face. - hypoalbuminemiaa condition in which a persons blood has less-than-normal amounts of albumin. - other signs and symptoms of primary amyloidosis may include - fatigue, or feeling tired - shortness of breath - low blood pressure - numbness, tingling, or a burning sensation in the hands or feet - weight loss - the symptoms of dialysis-related amyloidosis may include - pain, stiffness, and fluid in the joints. - abnormal, fluid-containing sacs, called cysts, in some bones. - carpal tunnel syndrome, caused by unusual buildup of amyloid proteins in the wrists. the symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome include numbness or tingling, sometimes associated with muscle weakness, in the fingers and hands. - a health care provider diagnoses primary amyloidosis of the kidneys with - a medical and family history - a physical exam - urinalysis - blood tests - a kidney biopsy - a health care provider diagnoses dialysis-related amyloidosis with - urinalysis - blood tests - imaging tests - a health care provider treats primary amyloidosis of the kidneys with the following: - medication therapy, including chemotherapy - a stem cell transplant - treating other conditions - a health care provider treats dialysis-related amyloidosis with - medication therapy - newer, more effective hemodialysis filters - surgery - a kidney transplant<end>
<question>what to do for amyloidosis and kidney disease ?<answer>researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing primary amyloidosis of the kidneys or dialysis-related amyloidosis. people with nephrotic syndrome may make dietary changes such as - limiting dietary sodium, often from salt, to help reduce edema and lower blood pressure - decreasing liquid intake to help reduce edema and lower blood pressure - eating a diet low in saturated fat and cholesterol to help control more-than-normal amounts of fats and cholesterol in the blood health care providers may recommend that people with kidney disease eat moderate or reduced amounts of protein. proteins break down into waste products that the kidneys filter from the blood. eating more protein than the body needs may burden the kidneys and cause kidney function to decline faster. however, protein intake that is too low may lead to malnutrition, a condition that occurs when the body does not get enough nutrients. people with kidney disease on a restricted protein diet should receive blood tests that can show low nutrient levels. people with primary amyloidosis of the kidneys or dialysis-related amyloidosis should talk with a health care provider about dietary restrictions to best manage their individual needs.<end>
<question>what is (are) amyloidosis and kidney disease ?<answer>amyloidosis is a rare disease that occurs when amyloid proteins are deposited in tissues and organs. amyloid proteins are abnormal proteins that the body cannot break down and recycle, as it does with normal proteins. when amyloid proteins clump together, they form amyloid deposits. the buildup of these deposits damages a persons organs and tissues. amyloidosis can affect different organs and tissues in different people and can affect more than one organ at the same time. amyloidosis most frequently affects the kidneys, heart, nervous system, liver, and digestive tract. the symptoms and severity of amyloidosis depend on the organs and tissues affected.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for amyloidosis and kidney disease ?<answer>a health care provider treats dialysis-related amyloidosis with - medication therapy - newer, more effective hemodialysis filters - surgery - a kidney transplant the goal of medication therapy and the use of newer, more effective hemodialysis filters is to reduce amyloid protein levels in the blood. medication therapy can help reduce symptoms such as pain and inflammation. a health care provider may treat a person with dialysis-related amyloidosis who has bone, joint, and tendon problems, such as bone cysts and carpal tunnel syndrome, using surgery. dialysis-related amyloidosis has no cure; however, a successful kidney transplant may stop the disease from progressing. more information is provided in the niddk health topic, treatment methods for kidney failure: transplantation.<end>
<question>how to diagnose creating a family health history ?<answer>genetic testing may be helpful whether the test identifies a mutation or not. test results can - serve as a relief, eliminating some of the uncertainty about a health condition - help doctors make recommendations for treatment or monitoring - give people information to use in making decisions about their and their familys health - help people take steps to lower the chance of developing a disease through, for example, earlier and more frequent screening or changes in diet and exercise habits - help people make informed choices about their future, such as whether to have a baby. serve as a relief, eliminating some of the uncertainty about a health condition help doctors make recommendations for treatment or monitoring give people information to use in making decisions about their and their familys health help people take steps to lower the chance of developing a disease through, for example, earlier and more frequent screening or changes in diet and exercise habits help people make informed choices about their future, such as whether to have a baby.<end>
<question>what is (are) creating a family health history ?<answer>in a genetic test, a small sample of blood, saliva, or tissue is taken to examine a person's genes. sometimes, genetic testing can detect diseases that may be preventable or treatable. this type of testing is available for thousands of conditions.<end>
<question>who is at risk for creating a family health history? ?<answer>diseases can have various causes many things influence your overall health and likelihood of developing a disease. sometimes, it's not clear what causes a disease. many diseases are thought to be caused by a combination of genetic, lifestyle, and environmental factors. the importance of any particular factor varies from person to person. if you have a disease, does that mean your children and grandchildren will get it, too? not necessarily. they may have a greater chance of developing the disease than someone without a similar family history. but they are not certain to get the disease. (watch the video to learn more about why family health history is important. to enlarge the video, click the brackets in the lower right-hand corner. to reduce the video, press the escape (esc) button on your keyboard.) health problems that may run in families common health problems that can run in a family include: - alzheimer's disease/dementia - arthritis - asthma - blood clots - cancer - depression - diabetes - heart disease - high cholesterol - high blood pressure - pregnancy losses and birth defects - stroke. alzheimer's disease/dementia arthritis asthma blood clots cancer depression diabetes heart disease high cholesterol high blood pressure pregnancy losses and birth defects stroke. learn more about the importance of family history in some of these health problems at diseases, genetics and family history. (center for disease control and prevention) heritable diseases some diseases are clearly heritable. this means the disease comes from a mutation, or harmful change, in a gene inherited from one or both parents. genes are small structures in your body's cells that determine how you look and tell your body how to work. examples of heritable diseases are huntington's disease, cystic fibrosis, and muscular dystrophy. learn basic information about chromosomes. learn basic information about dna. role of lifestyle and environment genes are not the only things that cause disease. lifestyle habits and environment also play a major part in developing disease. diet, weight, physical activity, tobacco and alcohol use, occupation, and where you live can each increase or decrease disease risk. for example, smoking increases the chance of developing heart disease and cancer. for common diseases like heart disease and cancer, habits like smoking or drinking too much alcohol may be more important in causing disease than genes. sun exposure is the major known environmental factor associated with the development of skin cancer of all types. however, other environmental and genetic factors can also increase a persons risk. the best defense against skin cancer is to encourage sun-protective behaviors, regular skin examinations, and skin self-awareness in an effort to decrease high-risk behaviors and optimize early detection of problems. learn more about the causes and risk factors for skin cancer. clues to your disease risk creating a family health history helps you know about diseases and disease risks. it can also show the way a disease occurs in a family. for example, you may find that a family member had a certain disease at an earlier age than usual (10 to 20 years before most people get it). that can increase other family members' risk. risk also goes up if a relative has a disease that usually does not affect a certain gender, for example, breast cancer in a man. certain combinations of diseases within a family -- such as breast and ovarian cancer, or heart disease and diabetes -- also increase the chance of developing those diseases. some risk factors are not apparent even if they appear healthy, people could be at risk for developing a serious disease that runs in the family. they could have risk factors that they cannot feel, such as high blood pressure. they might not even know the disease runs in their family because they've lost touch with family members with the disease or because other family members with the disease have kept the information private. another possibility is that family members who might have developed the disease died young in accidents or by other means. they might also be adopted and not share genes with members of their adoptive family. getting professional advice family members who think they might be at risk for a disease based on their family health history can ask their health care professionals for advice. the professional may order a test to see if the person has the disease or a risk factor for the disease. for instance, a mammogram can detect possible breast cancer, and a colonoscopy can find colon cancer. many diseases are more treatable if they are caught early. the first step toward better understanding of your family's health is to learn more about the health of close relatives such as parents, brothers and sisters, and children. creating a family health history is one way to do that.<end>
<question>what is (are) creating a family health history ?<answer>talk to other family members. you can also obtain a death certificate from a state or county vital statistics office to confirm a late relative's cause of death. funeral homes and online obituaries may also have this information.<end>
<question>what to do for abdominal adhesions ?<answer>researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing abdominal adhesions. a person with a partial intestinal obstruction may relieve symptoms with a liquid or low- fiber diet, which is more easily broken down into smaller particles by the digestive system.<end>
<question>how to prevent abdominal adhesions ?<answer>abdominal adhesions are diffi cult to prevent; however, certain surgical techniques can minimize abdominal adhesions. laparoscopic surgery decreases the potential for abdominal adhesions because several tiny incisions are made in the lower abdomen instead of one large incision. the surgeon inserts a laparoscopea thin tube with a tiny video camera attachedinto one of the small incisions. the camera sends a magnified image from inside the body to a video monitor. patients will usually receive general anesthesia during this surgery. if laparoscopic surgery is not possible and a large abdominal incision is required, at the end of surgery a special fi lmlike material can be inserted between organs or between the organs and the abdominal incision. the fi lmlike material, which looks similar to wax paper and is absorbed by the body in about a week, hydrates organs to help prevent abdominal adhesions. other steps taken during surgery to reduce abdominal adhesions include - using starch- and latex-free gloves - handling tissues and organs gently - shortening surgery time - using moistened drapes and swabs - occasionally applying saline solution<end>
<question>what is (are) abdominal adhesions ?<answer>abdominal adhesions are bands of fibrous tissue that can form between abdominal tissues and organs. normally, internal tissues and organs have slippery surfaces, preventing them from sticking together as the body moves. however, abdominal adhesions cause tissues and organs in the abdominal cavity to stick together.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for abdominal adhesions ?<answer>abdominal adhesions that do not cause symptoms generally do not require treatment. surgery is the only way to treat abdominal adhesions that cause pain, intestinal obstruction, or fertility problems. more surgery, however, carries the risk of additional abdominal adhesions. people should speak with their health care provider about the best way to treat their abdominal adhesions. complete intestinal obstructions usually require immediate surgery to clear the blockage. most partial intestinal obstructions can be managed without surgery.<end>
<question>is cystic fibrosis inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to cystic fibrosis ?<answer>mutations in the cftr gene cause cystic fibrosis. the cftr gene provides instructions for making a channel that transports negatively charged particles called chloride ions into and out of cells. chloride is a component of sodium chloride, a common salt found in sweat. chloride also has important functions in cells; for example, the flow of chloride ions helps control the movement of water in tissues, which is necessary for the production of thin, freely flowing mucus. mutations in the cftr gene disrupt the function of the chloride channels, preventing them from regulating the flow of chloride ions and water across cell membranes. as a result, cells that line the passageways of the lungs, pancreas, and other organs produce mucus that is unusually thick and sticky. this mucus clogs the airways and various ducts, causing the characteristic signs and symptoms of cystic fibrosis. other genetic and environmental factors likely influence the severity of the condition. for example, mutations in genes other than cftr might help explain why some people with cystic fibrosis are more severely affected than others. most of these genetic changes have not been identified, however.<end>
<question>what is (are) cystic fibrosis ?<answer>cystic fibrosis (cf) is an inherited disease of the mucus and sweat glands. it affects mostly your lungs, pancreas, liver, intestines, sinuses, and sex organs. cf causes your mucus to be thick and sticky. the mucus clogs the lungs, causing breathing problems and making it easy for bacteria to grow. this can lead to repeated lung infections and lung damage. the symptoms and severity of cf can vary. some people have serious problems from birth. others have a milder version of the disease that doesn't show up until they are teens or young adults. sometimes you will have few symptoms, but later you may have more symptoms. cf is diagnosed through various tests, such as gene, blood, and sweat tests. there is no cure for cf, but treatments have improved greatly in recent years. in the past, most deaths from cf were in children and teenagers. today, with improved treatments, some people who have cf are living into their forties, fifties, or older. treatments may include chest physical therapy, nutritional and respiratory therapies, medicines, and exercise. nih: national heart, lung, and blood institute<end>
<question>how many people are affected by cystic fibrosis ?<answer>cystic fibrosis is a common genetic disease within the white population in the united states. the disease occurs in 1 in 2,500 to 3,500 white newborns. cystic fibrosis is less common in other ethnic groups, affecting about 1 in 17,000 african americans and 1 in 31,000 asian americans.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for diabetic neuropathies: the nerve damage of diabetes ?<answer>the first treatment step is to bring blood glucose levels within the normal range to help prevent further nerve damage. blood glucose monitoring, meal planning, physical activity, and diabetes medicines or insulin will help control blood glucose levels. symptoms may get worse when blood glucose is first brought under control, but over time, maintaining lower blood glucose levels helps lessen symptoms. good blood glucose control may also help prevent or delay the onset of further problems. as scientists learn more about the underlying causes of neuropathy, new treatments may become available to help slow, prevent, or even reverse nerve damage. as described in the following sections, additional treatment depends on the type of nerve problem and symptom. pain relief doctors usually treat painful diabetic neuropathy with oral medications, although other types of treatments may help some people. people with severe nerve pain may benefit from a combination of medications or treatments and should consider talking with a health care provider about treatment options. medications used to help relieve diabetic nerve pain include - tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline, imipramine, and desipramine (norpramin, pertofrane) - other types of antidepressants, such as duloxetine (cymbalta), venlafaxine, bupropion (wellbutrin), paroxetine (paxil), and citalopram (celexa) - anticonvulsants, such as pregabalin (lyrica), gabapentin (gabarone, neurontin), carbamazepine, and lamotrigine (lamictal) - opioids and opioidlike drugs, such as controlled-release oxycodone, an opioid; and tramadol (ultram), an opioid that also acts as an antidepressant duloxetine and pregabalin are approved by the u.s. food and drug administration specifically for treating painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy. people do not have to be depressed for an antidepressant to help relieve their nerve pain. all medications have side effects, and some are not recommended for use in older adults or those with heart disease. because over-the-counter pain medicines such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen may not work well for treating most nerve pain and can have serious side effects, some experts recommend avoiding these medications. treatments that are applied to the skintypically to the feetinclude capsaicin cream and lidocaine patches (lidoderm, lidopain). studies suggest that nitrate sprays or patches for the feet may relieve pain. studies of alpha-lipoic acid, an antioxidant, and evening primrose oil suggest they may help relieve symptoms and improve nerve function in some patients. a device called a bed cradle can keep sheets and blankets from touching sensitive feet and legs. acupuncture, biofeedback, or physical therapy may help relieve pain in some people. treatments that involve electrical nerve stimulation, magnetic therapy, and laser or light therapy may be helpful but need further study. researchers are also studying several new therapies in clinical trials. gastrointestinal problems to relieve mild symptoms of gastroparesisindigestion, belching, nausea, or vomitingdoctors suggest eating small, frequent meals; avoiding fats; and eating less fiber. when symptoms are severe, doctors may prescribe erythromycin to speed digestion, metoclopramide to speed digestion and help relieve nausea, or other medications to help regulate digestion or reduce stomach acid secretion. to relieve diarrhea or other bowel problems, doctors may prescribe an antibiotic such as tetracycline, or other medications as appropriate. dizziness and weakness sitting or standing slowly may help prevent the light-headedness, dizziness, or fainting associated with blood pressure and circulation problems. raising the head of the bed or wearing elastic stockings may also help. some people benefit from increased salt in the diet and treatment with salt-retaining hormones. others benefit from high blood pressure medications. physical therapy can help when muscle weakness or loss of coordination is a problem. urinary and sexual problems to clear up a urinary tract infection, the doctor will probably prescribe an antibiotic. drinking plenty of fluids will help prevent another infection. people who have incontinence should try to urinate at regular intervalsevery 3 hours, for examplebecause they may not be able to tell when the bladder is full. to treat erectile dysfunction in men, the doctor will first do tests to rule out a hormonal cause. several methods are available to treat erectile dysfunction caused by neuropathy. medicines are available to help men have and maintain erections by increasing blood flow to the penis. some are oral medications and others are injected into the penis or inserted into the urethra at the tip of the penis. mechanical vacuum devices can also increase blood flow to the penis. another option is to surgically implant an inflatable or semirigid device in the penis. vaginal lubricants may be useful for women when neuropathy causes vaginal dryness. to treat problems with arousal and orgasm, the doctor may refer women to a gynecologist. foot care people with neuropathy need to take special care of their feet. the nerves to the feet are the longest in the body and are the ones most often affected by neuropathy. loss of sensation in the feet means that sores or injuries may not be noticed and may become ulcerated or infected. circulation problems also increase the risk of foot ulcers. smoking increases the risk of foot problems and amputation. a health care provider may be able to provide help with quitting smoking. more than 60 percent of all nontraumatic lower-limb amputations in the united states occur in people with diabetes. nontraumatic amputations are those not caused by trauma such as severe injuries from an accident. in 2004, about 71,000 nontraumatic amputations were performed in people with diabetes. comprehensive foot care programs can reduce amputation rates by 45 to 85 percent. careful foot care involves - cleaning the feet daily using warmnot hotwater and a mild soap. soaking the feet should be avoided. a soft towel can be used to dry the feet and between the toes. - inspecting the feet and toes every day for cuts, blisters, redness, swelling, calluses, or other problems. using a mirrorhandheld or placed on the floormay be helpful in checking the bottoms of the feet, or another person can help check the feet. a health care provider should be notified of any problems. - using lotion to moisturize the feet. getting lotion between the toes should be avoided. - filing corns and calluses gently with a pumice stone after a bath or shower. - cutting toenails to the shape of the toes and filing the edges with an emery board each week or when needed. - always wearing shoes or slippers to protect feet from injuries. wearing thick, soft, seamless socks can prevent skin irritation. - wearing shoes that fit well and allow the toes to move. new shoes can be broken in gradually by first wearing them for only an hour at a time. - looking shoes over carefully before putting them on and feeling the insides to make sure the shoes are free of tears, sharp edges, or objects that might injure the feet. people who need help taking care of their feet should consider making an appointment to see a foot doctor, also called a podiatrist.<end>
<question>how to diagnose diabetic neuropathies: the nerve damage of diabetes ?<answer>doctors diagnose neuropathy on the basis of symptoms and a physical exam. during the exam, the doctor may check blood pressure, heart rate, muscle strength, reflexes, and sensitivity to position changes, vibration, temperature, or light touch. foot exams experts recommend that people with diabetes have a comprehensive foot exam each year to check for peripheral neuropathy. people diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy need more frequent foot exams. a comprehensive foot exam assesses the skin, muscles, bones, circulation, and sensation of the feet. the doctor may assess protective sensation or feeling in the feet by touching them with a nylon monofilamentsimilar to a bristle on a hairbrushattached to a wand or by pricking them with a pin. people who cannot sense pressure from a pinprick or monofilament have lost protective sensation and are at risk for developing foot sores that may not heal properly. the doctor may also check temperature perception or use a tuning fork, which is more sensitive than touch pressure, to assess vibration perception. other tests the doctor may perform other tests as part of the diagnosis. - nerve conduction studies or electromyography are sometimes used to help determine the type and extent of nerve damage. nerve conduction studies check the transmission of electrical current through a nerve. electromyography shows how well muscles respond to electrical signals transmitted by nearby nerves. these tests are rarely needed to diagnose neuropathy. - a check of heart rate variability shows how the heart responds to deep breathing and to changes in blood pressure and posture. - ultrasound uses sound waves to produce an image of internal organs. an ultrasound of the bladder and other parts of the urinary tract, for example, can be used to assess the structure of these organs and show whether the bladder empties completely after urination.<end>
<question>what is (are) diabetic neuropathies: the nerve damage of diabetes ?<answer>diabetic neuropathies are a family of nerve disorders caused by diabetes. people with diabetes can, over time, develop nerve damage throughout the body. some people with nerve damage have no symptoms. others may have symptoms such as pain, tingling, or numbnessloss of feelingin the hands, arms, feet, and legs. nerve problems can occur in every organ system, including the digestive tract, heart, and sex organs. about 60 to 70 percent of people with diabetes have some form of neuropathy. people with diabetes can develop nerve problems at any time, but risk rises with age and longer duration of diabetes. the highest rates of neuropathy are among people who have had diabetes for at least 25 years. diabetic neuropathies also appear to be more common in people who have problems controlling their blood glucose, also called blood sugar, as well as those with high levels of blood fat and blood pressure and those who are overweight.<end>
<question>how to prevent diabetic neuropathies: the nerve damage of diabetes ?<answer>the best way to prevent neuropathy is to keep blood glucose levels as close to the normal range as possible. maintaining safe blood glucose levels protects nerves throughout the body.<end>
<question>is charcot-marie-tooth disease inherited ?<answer>the pattern of inheritance varies with the type of charcot-marie-tooth disease. cmt1, most cases of cmt2, and most intermediate forms are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. this pattern of inheritance means that one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. in most cases, an affected person has one affected parent. cmt4, a few cmt2 subtypes, and some intermediate forms are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. most often, the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. cmtx is inherited in an x-linked dominant pattern. a condition is considered x-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the x chromosome. the inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene is sufficient to cause the condition. in most cases, affected males, who have the alteration on their only copy of the x chromosome, experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females, who have two x chromosomes. a characteristic of x-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass x-linked traits to their sons. all daughters of affected men will have one altered x chromosome, but they may only have mild symptoms of the disorder. some cases of charcot-marie-tooth disease result from a new mutation and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to charcot-marie-tooth disease ?<answer>charcot-marie-tooth disease is caused by mutations in many different genes. these genes provide instructions for making proteins that are involved in the function of peripheral nerves in the feet, legs, and hands. the gene mutations that cause charcot-marie-tooth disease affect the function of the proteins in ways that are not fully understood; however, they likely impair axons, which transmit nerve impulses, or affect the specialized cells that produce myelin. as a result, peripheral nerve cells slowly lose the ability to stimulate the muscles and to transmit sensory signals to the brain. the list of genes associated with charcot-marie-tooth disease continues to grow as researchers study this disorder. different mutations within a particular gene may cause signs and symptoms of differing severities or lead to different types of charcot-marie-tooth disease. cmt1 is caused by mutations in the following genes: pmp22 (cmt1a and cmt1e), mpz (cmt1b), litaf (cmt1c), egr2 (cmt1d), and nefl (cmt1f). cmt2 can result from alterations in many genes, including mfn2 and kif1b (cmt2a); rab7a (cmt2b); lmna (cmt2b1); trpv4 (cmt2c); bscl2 and gars (cmt2d); nefl (cmt2e); hspb1 (cmt2f); mpz (cmt2i and cmt2j); gdap1 (cmt2k); and hspb8 (cmt2l). certain dnm2 gene mutations also cause a form of cmt2. cmt4 is caused by mutations in the following genes: gdap1 (cmt4a), mtmr2 (cmt4b1), sbf2 (cmt4b2), sh3tc2 (cmt4c), ndrg1 (cmt4d), egr2 (cmt4e), prx (cmt4f), fgd4 (cmt4h), and fig4 (cmt4j). intermediate forms of the disorder can be caused by alterations in genes including dnm2, mpz, yars, and gdap1. cmtx is caused by mutations in genes including gjb1 (cmtx1) and prps1 (cmtx5). mutations in additional genes, some of which have not been identified, also cause various forms of charcot-marie-tooth disease.<end>
<question>what is (are) charcot-marie-tooth disease ?<answer>charcot-marie-tooth disease (cmt) is a group of genetic nerve disorders. it is named after the three doctors who first identified it. in the united states, cmt affects about 1 in 2,500 people. cmt affects your peripheral nerves. peripheral nerves carry movement and sensation signals between the brain and spinal cord and the rest of the body. symptoms usually start around the teen years. foot problems such as high arches or hammertoes can be early symptoms. as cmt progresses, your lower legs may weaken. later, your hands may also become weak. doctors diagnose cmt by doing a neurologic exam, nerve tests, genetic tests, or a nerve biopsy. there is no cure. the disease can be so mild you don't realize you have it or severe enough to make you weak. physical therapy, occupational therapy, braces and other devices and sometimes surgery can help. nih: national institute of neurological disorders and stroke<end>
<question>how many people are affected by charcot-marie-tooth disease ?<answer>charcot-marie-tooth disease is the most common inherited disorder that involves the peripheral nerves, affecting an estimated 150,000 people in the united states. it occurs in populations worldwide with a prevalence of about 1 in 2,500 individuals.<end>
<question>is sotos syndrome inherited ?<answer>about 95 percent of sotos syndrome cases occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family. most of these cases result from new mutations involving the nsd1 gene. a few families have been described with more than one affected family member. these cases helped researchers determine that sotos syndrome has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to sotos syndrome ?<answer>mutations in the nsd1 gene are the primary cause of sotos syndrome, accounting for up to 90 percent of cases. other genetic causes of this condition have not been identified. the nsd1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that functions as a histone methyltransferase. histone methyltransferases are enzymes that modify structural proteins called histones, which attach (bind) to dna and give chromosomes their shape. by adding a molecule called a methyl group to histones (a process called methylation), histone methyltransferases regulate the activity of certain genes and can turn them on and off as needed. the nsd1 protein controls the activity of genes involved in normal growth and development, although most of these genes have not been identified. genetic changes involving the nsd1 gene prevent one copy of the gene from producing any functional protein. research suggests that a reduced amount of nsd1 protein disrupts the normal activity of genes involved in growth and development. however, it remains unclear exactly how a shortage of this protein during development leads to overgrowth, learning disabilities, and the other features of sotos syndrome.<end>
<question>what is (are) sotos syndrome ?<answer>sotos syndrome is a condition characterized mainly by distinctive facial features; overgrowth in childhood; and learning disabilities or delayed development. facial features may include a long, narrow face; a high forehead; flushed (reddened) cheeks; a small, pointed chin; and down-slanting palpebral fissures. affected infants and children tend to grow quickly; they are significantly taller than their siblings and peers and have a large head. other signs and symptoms may include intellectual disability; behavioral problems; problems with speech and language; and/or weak muscle tone (hypotonia). sotos syndrome is usually caused by a mutation in the nsd1 gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. about 95% of cases are due to a new mutation in the affected person and occur sporadically (are not inherited).<end>
<question>how many people are affected by sotos syndrome ?<answer>sotos syndrome is reported to occur in 1 in 10,000 to 14,000 newborns. because many of the features of sotos syndrome can be attributed to other conditions, many cases of this disorder are likely not properly diagnosed, so the true incidence may be closer to 1 in 5,000.<end>
<question>is hemophilia inherited ?<answer>hemophilia a and hemophilia b are inherited in an x-linked recessive pattern. the genes associated with these conditions are located on the x chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. in males (who have only one x chromosome), one altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. in females (who have two x chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, it is very rare for females to have hemophilia. a characteristic of x-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass x-linked traits to their sons. in x-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one altered copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. carrier females have about half the usual amount of coagulation factor viii or coagulation factor ix, which is generally enough for normal blood clotting. however, about 10 percent of carrier females have less than half the normal amount of one of these coagulation factors; these individuals are at risk for abnormal bleeding, particularly after an injury, surgery, or tooth extraction.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to hemophilia ?<answer>changes in the f8 gene are responsible for hemophilia a, while mutations in the f9 gene cause hemophilia b. the f8 gene provides instructions for making a protein called coagulation factor viii. a related protein, coagulation factor ix, is produced from the f9 gene. coagulation factors are proteins that work together in the blood clotting process. after an injury, blood clots protect the body by sealing off damaged blood vessels and preventing excessive blood loss. mutations in the f8 or f9 gene lead to the production of an abnormal version of coagulation factor viii or coagulation factor ix, or reduce the amount of one of these proteins. the altered or missing protein cannot participate effectively in the blood clotting process. as a result, blood clots cannot form properly in response to injury. these problems with blood clotting lead to continuous bleeding that can be difficult to control. the mutations that cause severe hemophilia almost completely eliminate the activity of coagulation factor viii or coagulation factor ix. the mutations responsible for mild and moderate hemophilia reduce but do not eliminate the activity of one of these proteins. another form of the disorder, known as acquired hemophilia, is not caused by inherited gene mutations. this rare condition is characterized by abnormal bleeding into the skin, muscles, or other soft tissues, usually beginning in adulthood. acquired hemophilia results when the body makes specialized proteins called autoantibodies that attack and disable coagulation factor viii. the production of autoantibodies is sometimes associated with pregnancy, immune system disorders, cancer, or allergic reactions to certain drugs. in about half of cases, the cause of acquired hemophilia is unknown.<end>
<question>what is (are) hemophilia ?<answer>hemophilia is a rare disorder in which the blood does not clot normally. it is usually inherited. hemophilia usually occurs in males. if you have hemophilia, you have little or no clotting factor. clotting factor is a protein needed for normal blood clotting. without it, you may bleed for a long time after an injury or accident. you also may bleed into your knees, ankles, and elbows. bleeding in the joints causes pain and, if not treated, can lead to arthritis. bleeding in the brain, a very serious complication of hemophilia, requires emergency treatment. the main symptoms of hemophilia are excessive bleeding and easy bruising. blood tests can tell if you have it. the main treatment is injecting the missing clotting factor into the bloodstream. you may need it on a regular basis, or just when bleeding occurs. nih: national heart, lung, and blood institute<end>
<question>how many people are affected by hemophilia ?<answer>the two major forms of hemophilia occur much more commonly in males than in females. hemophilia a is the most common type of the condition; 1 in 4,000 to 1 in 5,000 males worldwide are born with this disorder. hemophilia b occurs in approximately 1 in 20,000 newborn males worldwide.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for depression ?<answer>several studies are looking at ways to help older adults get better access to depression treatment. one is developing and testing an education and intervention program to help primary care clinics and providers identify and treat late-life depression. another study found that depressed older adults who had a "care manager" monitor their symptoms, side effects, and progress got better more quickly -- and stayed better longer -- than those who did not have case-managed care. still other projects are investigating ways of improving older adults engagement in and ability to follow treatment plans for depression. researchers are also looking at ways to - better understand the relationship between other medical illnesses and depression - integrate treatment for depression with treatments for other medical conditions a person may have - produce a quicker response to treatment - develop new methods for delivering treatment to those who are homebound, unable to move around without assistance, or who live in rural areas. (e.g., via use of telephonic or internet-assisted therapies) - help prevent depression by keeping it from developing or recurring in those at risk or by preventing those with milder symptoms from progressing to more severe episodes of depression. better understand the relationship between other medical illnesses and depression integrate treatment for depression with treatments for other medical conditions a person may have produce a quicker response to treatment develop new methods for delivering treatment to those who are homebound, unable to move around without assistance, or who live in rural areas. (e.g., via use of telephonic or internet-assisted therapies) help prevent depression by keeping it from developing or recurring in those at risk or by preventing those with milder symptoms from progressing to more severe episodes of depression.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for depression ?<answer>a bushy, wild-growing plant with yellow flowers, st john's wort has been used for centuries in many folk and herbal remedies. it is commonly used in europe to treat mild depression, and it is a top-seller in the united states as well. in a study funded by the national institutes of health, the herb was found to be no more effective than a placebo (sugar pill) in treating adults suffering from major depression. other research has shown that st. john's wort can interact unfavorably with other drugs. the herb interferes with certain drugs used to treat heart disease, depression, seizures, certain cancers, and organ transplant rejection. because of these potential interactions, older adults should always consult with their doctors before taking any herbal supplement. another product sold as a dietary supplement, s-adenosyl methionine (same), has shown promise in controlled trials as helpful when added to an ssri antidepressant that is only partially effective.<end>
<question>what is (are) depression ?<answer>everyone feels blue or sad now and then, but these feelings don't usually last long and pass within a couple of days. when a person has depression, it interferes with daily life and normal functioning, and causes pain for both the person with depression and those who care about him or her. doctors call this condition "depressive disorder," or "clinical depression." depression in older adults important life changes that happen as we get older may cause feelings of uneasiness, stress, and sadness. for instance, the death of a loved one, moving from work into retirement, or dealing with a serious illness can leave people feeling sad or anxious. after a period of adjustment, many older adults can regain their emotional balance, but others do not and may develop depression. depression is a common problem among older adults, but it is not a normal part of aging. in fact, studies show that most older adults feel satisfied with their lives, despite having more physical ailments. however, when older adults do suffer from depression, it may be overlooked because they may be less willing to talk about feelings of sadness or grief, or they may show different, less obvious symptoms, and doctors may be less likely to suspect or spot it. sometimes it can be difficult to distinguish grief from major depression. grief after loss of a loved one is a normal reaction to the loss and generally does not require professional mental health treatment. however, grief that lasts for a very long time following a loss may require treatment. test depression and suicide though it is widely believed that suicide more often affects young people, suicide is a serious problem among older adults, too particularly among older men and depression is usually a major contributing factor. adults 65 and older have a suicide rate that is higher than the rate for the national population, but there are some major differences between older men and women. while suicide rates for older women are somewhat lower than those for young and middle-aged women, rates among men 75 and older are higher than those for younger men. in fact, white men age 85 and older have the highest suicide rate in the united states. types of depression there are several types of depression. the most common types are major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder. - major depressive disorder, also called major depression or clinical depression, is characterized by a combination of symptoms that interfere with a person's ability to work, sleep, concentrate, eat, and enjoy activities he or she once liked. major depression prevents a person from functioning normally. an episode of major depression may occur only once in a person's lifetime, but more often, it recurs throughout a person's life. - dysthymic disorder, also called dysthymia, is a less severe but more long-lasting form of depression. dysthymia is characterized by symptoms lasting two years or longer that keep a person from functioning normally or feeling well. people with dysthymia may also experience one or more episodes of major depression during their lifetime. major depressive disorder, also called major depression or clinical depression, is characterized by a combination of symptoms that interfere with a person's ability to work, sleep, concentrate, eat, and enjoy activities he or she once liked. major depression prevents a person from functioning normally. an episode of major depression may occur only once in a person's lifetime, but more often, it recurs throughout a person's life. dysthymic disorder, also called dysthymia, is a less severe but more long-lasting form of depression. dysthymia is characterized by symptoms lasting two years or longer that keep a person from functioning normally or feeling well. people with dysthymia may also experience one or more episodes of major depression during their lifetime. other types of depression include subsyndromal depression, psychotic depression. and bipolar depression. - subsyndromal depression is common among older adults. it includes less severe but clear symptoms of depression that fall short of being major depression or dysthymia. having subsyndromal depression may increase a person's risk of developing major depression. - psychotic depression occurs when a person has severe depression plus some form of psychosis, such as having disturbing false beliefs or a break with reality (delusions), or hearing or seeing upsetting things that others cannot hear or see (hallucinations). - bipolar depression, also called manic-depressive illness, is not as common as major depression or dysthymia. bipolar disorder is characterized by cycling mood changesfrom extreme highs (e.g., mania) to extreme lows (e.g., depression). subsyndromal depression is common among older adults. it includes less severe but clear symptoms of depression that fall short of being major depression or dysthymia. having subsyndromal depression may increase a person's risk of developing major depression. psychotic depression occurs when a person has severe depression plus some form of psychosis, such as having disturbing false beliefs or a break with reality (delusions), or hearing or seeing upsetting things that others cannot hear or see (hallucinations). bipolar depression, also called manic-depressive illness, is not as common as major depression or dysthymia. bipolar disorder is characterized by cycling mood changesfrom extreme highs (e.g., mania) to extreme lows (e.g., depression).<end>
<question>what are the treatments for depression ?<answer>medications called antidepressants work to normalize brain chemicals called neurotransmitters, notably serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine. scientists studying depression have found that these chemicals, and possibly others, are involved in regulating mood, but they are unsure of exactly how they work. newer antidepressants. the newest and most popular types of antidepressant medications are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris). they include fluoxetine (prozac), citalopram (celexa) and several others. similar to ssris are serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (snris) and include venlafaxine (effexor) and duloxetine (cymbalta). another newer antidepressant bupropion (wellbutrin) is neither an ssri nor an snri but is popular as well. older antidepressants. older antidepressants, called tricyclics and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (maois), are still used sometimes, too. however, these older antidepressants are not as popular as the newer ones because they tend to have more side effects. however, medications affect everyone differently so talk with your doctor to decide which type is best for you. practical considerations. people taking maois must follow strict food and medicine restrictions to avoid potentially serious interactions. if you take an maoi, your doctor should give you a complete list of foods, medicines, and substances to avoid. maois can also react with ssris to produce a serious condition called "serotonin syndrome," which can cause confusion, hallucinations, increased sweating, muscle stiffness, seizures, changes in blood pressure or heart rhythm, and other potentially life threatening conditions. maois should not be taken with ssris. caution is required when combining any serotonergic medication (not just maois) with ssris. for example, in 2006 the fda issued specific warnings against using triptans that are commonly-prescribed to treat migraine headaches together with ssris or snris. using these medications together can cause serotonin syndrome.<end>
<question>is thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura inherited ?<answer>the familial form of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. the acquired form of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is not inherited.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura ?<answer>mutations in the adamts13 gene cause the familial form of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. the adamts13 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in the normal process of blood clotting. mutations in this gene lead to a severe reduction in the activity of this enzyme. the acquired form of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura also results from a reduction in adamts13 enzyme activity; however, people with the acquired form do not have mutations in the adamts13 gene. instead, their immune systems often produce specific proteins called autoantibodies that block the activity of the enzyme. a lack of adamts13 enzyme activity disrupts the usual balance between bleeding and clotting. normally, blood clots form at the site of an injury to seal off damaged blood vessels and prevent excess blood loss. in people with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, clots form throughout the body as platelets bind together abnormally and stick to the walls of blood vessels. these clots can block small blood vessels, causing organ damage and the other features of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. researchers believe that other genetic or environmental factors may contribute to the signs and symptoms of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. in people with reduced adamts13 enzyme activity, factors such as pregnancy, surgery, and infection may trigger abnormal blood clotting and its associated complications.<end>
<question>what is (are) thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura ?<answer>thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (ttp) is a rare blood disorder. in ttp, blood clots form in small blood vessels throughout the body. the clots can limit or block the flow of oxygen-rich blood to the body's organs, such as the brain, kidneys, and heart. as a result, serious health problems can develop. the increased clotting that occurs in ttp also uses up platelets (plate-lets) in the blood. platelets are blood cell fragments that help form blood clots. these cell fragments stick together to seal small cuts and breaks on blood vessel walls and stop bleeding. with fewer platelets available in the blood, bleeding problems can occur. people who have ttp may bleed inside their bodies, underneath the skin, or from the surface of the skin. when cut or injured, they also may bleed longer than normal. "thrombotic" (throm-bot-ik) refers to the blood clots that form. "thrombocytopenic" (throm-bo-cy-toe-pee-nick) means the blood has a lower than normal number of platelets. "purpura" (purr-purr-ah) refers to purple bruises caused by bleeding under the skin. bleeding under the skin also can cause tiny red or purple dots on the skin. these pinpoint-sized dots are called petechiae (peh-tee-kee-ay). petechiae may look like a rash. purpura and petechiae ttp also can cause red blood cells to break apart faster than the body can replace them. this leads to hemolytic anemia (hee-moh-lit-ick uh-nee-me-uh)a rare form of anemia. anemia is a condition in which the body has a lower than normal number of red blood cells. a lack of activity in the adamts13 enzyme (a type of protein in the blood) causes ttp. the adamts13 gene controls the enzyme, which is involved in blood clotting. the enzyme breaks up a large protein called von willebrand factor that clumps together with platelets to form blood clots. types of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura the two main types of ttp are inherited and acquired. "inherited" means the condition is passed from parents to children through genes. this type of ttp mainly affects newborns and children. in inherited ttp, the adamts13 gene is faulty and doesn't prompt the body to make a normal adamts13 enzyme. as a result, enzyme activity is lacking or changed. acquired ttp is the more common type of the disorder. "acquired" means you aren't born with the disorder, but you develop it. this type of ttp mostly occurs in adults, but it can affect children. in acquired ttp, the adamts13 gene isn't faulty. instead, the body makes antibodies (proteins) that block the activity of the adamts13 enzyme. it's not clear what triggers inherited and acquired ttp, but some factors may play a role. these factors may include: some diseases and conditions, such as pregnancy, cancer, hiv, lupus, and infections some medical procedures, such as surgery and blood and marrow stem cell transplant some medicines, such as chemotherapy, ticlopidine, clopidogrel, cyclosporine a, and hormone therapy and estrogens quinine, which is a substance often found in tonic water and nutritional health products if you have ttp, you may sometimes hear it referred to as ttphus. hus, or hemolytic-uremic syndrome, is a disorder that resembles ttp, but is more common in children. kidney problems also tend to be worse in hus. although some researchers think ttp and hus are two forms of a single syndrome, recent evidence suggests that each has different causes. outlook ttp is a rare disorder. it can be fatal or cause lasting damage, such as brain damage or a stroke, if it's not treated right away. ttp usually occurs suddenly and lasts for days or weeks, but it can continue for months. relapses (or flareups) can occur in up to 60 percent of people who have the acquired type of ttp. many people who have inherited ttp have frequent flareups that need to be treated. treatments for ttp include infusions of fresh frozen plasma and plasma exchange, also called plasmapheresis (plaz-ma-feh-re-sis). these treatments have greatly improved the outlook of the disorder.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura ?<answer>the precise incidence of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is unknown. researchers estimate that, depending on geographic location, the condition affects 1.7 to 11 per million people each year in the united states. for unknown reasons, the disorder occurs more frequently in women than in men. the acquired form of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is much more common than the familial form.<end>
<question>is sickle cell disease inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to sickle cell disease ?<answer>mutations in the hbb gene cause sickle cell disease. hemoglobin consists of four protein subunits, typically, two subunits called alpha-globin and two subunits called beta-globin. the hbb gene provides instructions for making beta-globin. various versions of beta-globin result from different mutations in the hbb gene. one particular hbb gene mutation produces an abnormal version of beta-globin known as hemoglobin s (hbs). other mutations in the hbb gene lead to additional abnormal versions of beta-globin such as hemoglobin c (hbc) and hemoglobin e (hbe). hbb gene mutations can also result in an unusually low level of beta-globin; this abnormality is called beta thalassemia. in people with sickle cell disease, at least one of the beta-globin subunits in hemoglobin is replaced with hemoglobin s. in sickle cell anemia, which is a common form of sickle cell disease, hemoglobin s replaces both beta-globin subunits in hemoglobin. in other types of sickle cell disease, just one beta-globin subunit in hemoglobin is replaced with hemoglobin s. the other beta-globin subunit is replaced with a different abnormal variant, such as hemoglobin c. for example, people with sickle-hemoglobin c (hbsc) disease have hemoglobin molecules with hemoglobin s and hemoglobin c instead of beta-globin. if mutations that produce hemoglobin s and beta thalassemia occur together, individuals have hemoglobin s-beta thalassemia (hbsbetathal) disease. abnormal versions of beta-globin can distort red blood cells into a sickle shape. the sickle-shaped red blood cells die prematurely, which can lead to anemia. sometimes the inflexible, sickle-shaped cells get stuck in small blood vessels and can cause serious medical complications.<end>
<question>what is (are) sickle cell disease ?<answer>espaol the term sickle cell disease (scd) describes a group of inherited red blood cell disorders. people with scd have abnormal hemoglobin, called hemoglobin s or sickle hemoglobin, in their red blood cells. hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen throughout the body. inherited means that the disease is passed by genes from parents to their children. scd is not contagious. a person cannot catch it, like a cold or infection, from someone else. people who have scd inherit two abnormal hemoglobin genes, one from each parent. in all forms of scd, at least one of the two abnormal genes causes a persons body to make hemoglobin s. when a person has two hemoglobin s genes, hemoglobin ss, the disease is called sickle cell anemia. this is the most common and often most severe kind of scd. hemoglobin sc disease and hemoglobin s thalassemia (thal-uh-see-me-uh) are two other common forms of scd. some forms of sickle cell disease hemoglobin ss hemoglobin sc hemoglobin s0 thalassemia hemoglobin s+ thalassemia hemoglobin sd hemoglobin se overview cells in tissues need a steady supply of oxygen to work well. normally, hemoglobin in red blood cells takes up oxygen in the lungs and carries it to all the tissues of the body. red blood cells that contain normal hemoglobin are disc shaped (like a doughnut without a hole). this shape allows the cells to be flexible so that they can move through large and small blood vessels to deliver oxygen. sickle hemoglobin is not like normal hemoglobin. it can form stiff rods within the red cell, changing it into a crescent, or sickle shape. sickle-shaped cells are not flexible and can stick to vessel walls, causing a blockage that slows or stops the flow of blood. when this happens, oxygen cant reach nearby tissues. normal red cells and sickle red cells the lack of tissue oxygen can cause attacks of sudden, severe pain, called pain crises. these pain attacks can occur without warning, and a person often needs to go to the hospital for effective treatment. most children with scd are pain free between painful crises, but adolescents and adults may also suffer with chronic ongoing pain. the red cell sickling and poor oxygen delivery can also cause organ damage. over a lifetime, scd can harm a persons spleen, brain, eyes, lungs, liver, heart, kidneys, penis, joints, bones, or skin. sickle cells cant change shape easily, so they tend to burst apart or hemolyze. normal red blood cells live about 90 to 120 days, but sickle cells last only 10 to 20 days. the body is always making new red blood cells to replace the old cells; however, in scd the body may have trouble keeping up with how fast the cells are being destroyed. because of this, the number of red blood cells is usually lower than normal. this condition, called anemia, can make a person have less energy. outlook sickle cell disease is a life-long illness. the severity of the disease varies widely from person to person. in high-income countries like the united states, the life expectancy of a person with scd is now about 4060 years. in 1973, the average lifespan of a person with scd in the united states was only 14 years. advances in the diagnosis and care of scd have made this improvement possible. at the present time, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (hsct) is the only cure for scd. unfortunately, most people with scd are either too old for a transplant or dont have a relative who is a good enough genetic match for them to act as a donor. a well-matched donor is needed to have the best chance for a successful transplant. there are effective treatments that can reduce symptoms and prolong life. early diagnosis and regular medical care to prevent complications also contribute to improved well-being.<end>
<question>how many people are affected by sickle cell disease ?<answer>sickle cell disease affects millions of people worldwide. it is most common among people whose ancestors come from africa; mediterranean countries such as greece, turkey, and italy; the arabian peninsula; india; and spanish-speaking regions in south america, central america, and parts of the caribbean. sickle cell disease is the most common inherited blood disorder in the united states, affecting 70,000 to 80,000 americans. the disease is estimated to occur in 1 in 500 african americans and 1 in 1,000 to 1,400 hispanic americans.<end>
<question>is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis inherited ?<answer>about 90 to 95 percent of als cases are sporadic, which means they are not inherited. an estimated 5 to 10 percent of als is familial and caused by mutations in one of several genes. the pattern of inheritance varies depending on the gene involved. most cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. in most cases, an affected person has one parent with the condition. some people who inherit a familial genetic mutation known to cause als never develop features of the condition. (this situation is known as reduced penetrance.) it is unclear why some people with a mutated gene develop the disease and other people with a mutated gene do not. less frequently, als is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. because an affected person's parents are not affected, autosomal recessive als is often mistaken for sporadic als even though it is caused by a familial genetic mutation. very rarely, als is inherited in an x-linked dominant pattern. x-linked conditions occur when the gene associated with the condition is located on the x chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. in females (who have two x chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. in males (who have only one x chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of the gene in each cell causes the disorder. in most cases, males tend to develop the disease earlier and have a decreased life expectancy compared with females. a characteristic of x-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass x-linked traits to their sons.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ?<answer>mutations in several genes can cause familial als and contribute to the development of sporadic als. mutations in the c9orf72 gene account for 30 to 40 percent of familial als in the united states and europe. worldwide, sod1 gene mutations cause 15 to 20 percent of familial als, and tardbp and fus gene mutations each account for about 5 percent of cases. the other genes that have been associated with familial als each account for a small proportion of cases. it is estimated that 60 percent of individuals with familial als have an identified genetic mutation. the cause of the condition in the remaining individuals is unknown. the c9orf72, sod1, tardbp, and fus genes are key to the normal functioning of motor neurons and other cells. it is unclear how mutations in these genes contribute to the death of motor neurons, but it is thought that motor neurons are more sensitive to disruptions in function because of their large size. most motor neurons affected by als have a buildup of protein clumps (aggregates); however, it is unknown whether these aggregates are involved in causing als or are a byproduct of the dying cell. in some cases of familial als due to mutations in other genes, studies have identified the mechanisms that lead to als. some gene mutations lead to a disruption in the development of axons, the specialized extensions of nerve cells (such as motor neurons) that transmit nerve impulses. the altered axons may impair transmission of impulses from nerves to muscles, leading to muscle weakness and atrophy. other mutations lead to a slowing in the transport of materials needed for the proper function of axons in motor neurons, eventually causing the motor neurons to die. additional gene mutations prevent the breakdown of toxic substances, leading to their buildup in nerve cells. the accumulation of toxic substances can damage motor neurons and eventually cause cell death. in some cases of als, it is unknown how the gene mutation causes the condition. the cause of sporadic als is largely unknown but probably involves a combination of genetic and environmental factors. variations in many genes, including the previously mentioned genes involved in transmission of nerve impulses and transportation of materials within neurons, increase the risk of developing als. gene mutations that are risk factors for als may add, delete, or change dna building blocks (nucleotides), resulting in the production of a protein with an altered or reduced function. while genetic variations have been associated with sporadic als, not all genetic factors have been identified and it is unclear how most genetic changes influence the development of the disease. people with a gene variation that increases their risk of als likely require additional genetic and environmental triggers to develop the disorder.<end>
<question>what is (are) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ?<answer>amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) is a nervous system disease that attacks nerve cells called neurons in your brain and spinal cord. these neurons transmit messages from your brain and spinal cord to your voluntary muscles - the ones you can control, like in your arms and legs. at first, this causes mild muscle problems. some people notice - trouble walking or running - trouble writing - speech problems eventually, you lose your strength and cannot move. when muscles in your chest fail, you cannot breathe. a breathing machine can help, but most people with als die from respiratory failure. the disease usually strikes between age 40 and 60. more men than women get it. no one knows what causes als. it can run in families, but usually it strikes at random. there is no cure. medicines can relieve symptoms and, sometimes, prolong survival. nih: national institute of neurological disorders and stroke<end>
<question>how many people are affected by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ?<answer>about 5,000 people in the united states are diagnosed with als each year. worldwide, this disorder occurs in 2 to 5 per 100,000 individuals. only a small percentage of cases have a known genetic cause. among the chamorro people of guam and people from the kii peninsula of japan, als-pdc can be 100 times more frequent than als is in other populations. als-pdc has not been reported outside of these populations.<end>
<question>what to do for what i need to know about kidney failure and how its treated ?<answer>- kidney failure means your kidneys no longer filter your blood well enough to keep you healthy. - the treatments for kidney failure are - hemodialysis - peritoneal dialysis - a kidney transplant - conservative management - hemodialysis uses a machine to filter your blood when your kidneys are too sick to filter any more. - peritoneal dialysis uses the lining of your belly to filter your blood inside your body. - a kidney transplant places a healthy kidney from another person into your body. - conservative management means your doctors take care of you without dialysis or a transplant. the doctors may give you medicines that make you feel more comfortable. - all dialysis and transplant centers have a dietitian. the dietitian helps people with kidney failure learn about healthy food choices.<end>
<question>what to do for what i need to know about kidney failure and how its treated ?<answer>eating healthy foods can help you keep up your energy and strength. all dialysis and transplant centers have a dietitian. the dietitian helps people with kidney failure learn about healthy food choices. you should talk with your centers dietitian to make a meal plan. the best diet for you will depend on which kidney failure treatment you choose after talking with your doctor. - hemodialysis - limit how much liquid and water you drink. fluid can build up in your body between hemodialysis sessions. also, many foods contain water. the extra fluid in your body can cause swelling and high blood pressure. extra fluid in your body makes your heart work harder. - - limit sodium, or salt. watch out for sodium in frozen foods and prepared meals. you can also find sodium in canned foods, hot dogs, and fast food. sodium makes you thirsty, which makes you drink more water and other liquids than you should. - read more in the national kidney disease education program (nkdep) fact sheet sodium. - limit potassium. potassium is found in many fruits and vegetables such as potatoes, tomatoes, oranges, and bananas. too much potassium can make your heart beat unevenly. hemodialysis does not remove potassium from your body well. - read more in the nkdep fact sheet potassium. - eat protein-rich foods such as meat, fish, and eggs. hemodialysis removes protein from your body. - read more in the nkdep fact sheet protein. - limit phosphorus. phosphorus helps your bones, blood vessels, and muscles work. - however, too much phosphorus can make your bones weak. limiting phosphorus can be hard. foods that contain phosphorus, such as meat and milk, also contain protein that you need. you should be careful to eat enough protein, yet not so much that you get too much phosphorus. you can avoid other foods that contain phosphorus, such as cola, tea, beans, and nuts. - read more in the nkdep fact sheet phosphorus. - find healthy ways to add calories to your diet. calories are found in all foods and give your body energy. many people on hemodialysis do not have a good appetite and do not get enough calories. vegetable oils are good sources of calories. vegetable oils include olive oil, canola oil, and safflower oil. use them on breads, rice, and noodles. hard candy, sugar, honey, jam, and jelly provide calories and energy. however, if you have diabetes, speak with your doctor or dietitian before eating extra sweets. - more information about nutrition for people who are on hemodialysis is provided in the niddk health topic, eat right to feel right on hemodialysis. - peritoneal dialysis - drink as much water and other liquids as you need. if you are holding too much fluid or too little fluid, your doctor needs to know. - limit sodium to control your thirst and help prevent heart problems. you can use spices other than salt to flavor your food. - - you may need to eat more potassium-rich foods. peritoneal dialysis removes potassium from your body. talk with your doctor or dietitian about the right amount of potassium for you. - eat protein-rich foods. peritoneal dialysis removes even more protein from your body than hemodialysis. - limit phosphorus to keep your bones strong. - you may need to limit your calorie intake. the salty water also contains some sugar. your body absorbs the sugar, which can cause you to gain weight. - kidney transplant - limit sodium to help prevent heart problems. - you should be able to eat normal amounts of phosphorus and potassium. you may need to adjust the amounts if blood tests show a problem. - - eat protein-rich foods to repair muscle breakdown and protect against infection. - you may need to limit your calories. the medicines you take can make you gain weight. - conservative management - limit protein to prevent the buildup of wastes in your blood. you may have other needs and limits, depending on how well your treatments work.<end>
<question>what is (are) what i need to know about kidney failure and how its treated ?<answer>you have two kidneys. the kidneys are shaped like beans. each kidney is about the size of a fist. they are located just below your ribcage, one on each side of your spine. your kidneys filter your blood. each kidney is made of 1 million little filters. during every minute of every day, these filters take out waste materials that can hurt you. they also take out extra fluid from your blood. the wastes and extra fluid make urine. the urine flows from your kidneys to your bladder through tubes called ureters.the bladder stores urine until you urinate. then, urine leaves the body through a tube called the urethra. *see the pronunciation guide for tips on how to say the the words in bold type.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for what i need to know about kidney failure and how its treated ?<answer>if you have kidney failure, learn about the treatments and think about which one best fits you. talk with people who are on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. ask what is good and bad about each treatment. if you make a choice and find you dont like it, talk with your doctor about trying something else. ask your doctor about the transplant waiting list and the medicines needed after a transplant. talk with people who have had kidney transplants and ask how it has changed their lives. if you plan to keep working, think about which treatment choice would make working easier. if spending time with family and friends means a lot to you, ask which treatment gives you the most free time. find out which treatment will give you the best chance to be healthy and live longer. if you are thinking about conservative management, you may wish to speak with your family, friends, doctor, or mental health counselor as you decide. you can take control of your care by talking with your doctor. you may need time to get used to your new treatment. kidney failure can make your life harder. treatments can help improve your life.<end>
<question>what is (are) knee replacement ?<answer>you can learn more about knee replacement from the following resources. national institute of arthritis and musculoskeletal and skin diseases (niams) information clearinghouse national institutes of health 1 ams circle bethesda, md 20892-3675 phone: 301-495-4484 toll free: 877-22-niams (226-4267) tty: 301-565-2966 fax: 301-718-6366 email: niamsinfo@mail.nih.gov website: http://www.niams.nih.gov american physical therapy association website: http://www.apta.org arthritis foundation website: http://www.arthritis.org the knee society website: http://www.kneesociety.org medlineplus website: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/kneereplacement.html<end>
<question>who is at risk for knee replacement? ?<answer>because a fall can damage your new knee, making your home a safe place is crucial. before your surgery, look for and correct hazards, including cluttered floors, loose electrical cords, unsecured rugs, and dark hallways. a raised toilet seat can make it easier to get up and down. grab bars in the tub can keep you steady.<end>
<question>what is (are) knee replacement ?<answer>there are many different types and designs of artificial knees. most consist of three components: - the femoral component, which is the part that attaches to the thigh bone - the tibial component, the part that attaches to the shin bone - the patellar component, the knee cap. the femoral component, which is the part that attaches to the thigh bone the tibial component, the part that attaches to the shin bone the patellar component, the knee cap. total and partial knee replacement knee replacement may be either total or partial/unicompartmental. in total knee replacement, as the name suggests, the entire knee joint is replaced. you will likely need a total knee replacement if you have damage to several parts of your knee. in partial/unicompartmental knee replacement, the surgeon replaces just the damaged part of the knee. you may be able to have a partial knee replacement if only one section of your knee is damaged. however, when one part is replaced, there is a chance that another part will develop arthritis, requiring further surgery. cemented and uncemented joint components joint components may also be attached to your own bone in different ways. most are cemented with a special joint glue into your existing bone; others rely on a process called biologic fixation to hold them in place. this means that the parts are made with a porous surface, and over time your own bone grows into the joint surface to secure them. in some cases, surgeons use a combination of cemented and uncemented parts. this is referred to as a hybrid implant. minimally invasive surgery while some knee replacement surgery requires an 8- to 12-inch incision in the front of the knee, surgeons at many medical centers are now performing what is called minimally invasive surgery using incisions of 3 to 5 inches or even smaller. because the incision is smaller, there may be less pain and a shorter recovery time. if you think you might be interested in minimally invasive surgery, speak with your surgeon.<end>
<question>what are the complications of knee replacement ?<answer>to reduce the risk of clots, your doctor may have you elevate your leg periodically and prescribe special exercises, support hose, or blood thinners. to reduce the risk of infection, your doctor may prescribe antibiotics for you to take prior to your surgery and for a short time afterward.<end>
<question>what to do for adrenal insufficiency and addison's disease ?<answer>some people with addisons disease who are aldosterone deficient can benefit from following a diet rich in sodium. a health care provider or a dietitian can give specific recommendations on appropriate sodium sources and daily sodium guidelines if necessary. corticosteroid treatment is linked to an increased risk of osteoporosisa condition in which the bones become less dense and more likely to fracture. people who take corticosteroids should protect their bone health by consuming enough dietary calcium and vitamin d. a health care provider or a dietitian can give specific recommendations on appropriate daily calcium intake based upon age and suggest the best types of calcium supplements, if necessary.<end>
<question>how to prevent adrenal insufficiency and addison's disease ?<answer>the following steps can help a person prevent adrenal crisis: - ask a health care provider about possibly having a shortage of adrenal hormones, if always feeling tired, weak, or losing weight. - learn how to increase the dose of corticosteroid for adrenal insufficiency when ill. ask a health care provider for written instructions for sick days. first discuss the decision to increase the dose with the health care provider when ill. - when very ill, especially if vomiting and not able to take pills, seek emergency medical care immediately.<end>
<question>what is (are) adrenal insufficiency and addison's disease ?<answer>adrenal insufficiency is an endocrine, or hormonal, disorder that occurs when the adrenal glands do not produce enough of certain hormones. the adrenal glands are located just above the kidneys. adrenal insufficiency can be primary or secondary. addisons disease, the common term for primary adrenal insufficiency, occurs when the adrenal glands are damaged and cannot produce enough of the adrenal hormone cortisol. the adrenal hormone aldosterone may also be lacking. addisons disease affects 110 to 144 of every 1 million people in developed countries.1 secondary adrenal insufficiency occurs when the pituitary glanda pea-sized gland at the base of the brainfails to produce enough adrenocorticotropin (acth), a hormone that stimulates the adrenal glands to produce the hormone cortisol. if acth output is too low, cortisol production drops. eventually, the adrenal glands can shrink due to lack of acth stimulation. secondary adrenal insufficiency is much more common than addisons disease. 1<end>
<question>what are the treatments for adrenal insufficiency and addison's disease ?<answer>adrenal crisis is treated with adrenal hormones. people with adrenal crisis need immediate treatment. any delay can cause death. when people with adrenal crisis are vomiting or unconscious and cannot take their medication, the hormones can be given as an injection. a person with adrenal insufficiency should carry a corticosteroid injection at all times and make sure that others know how and when to administer the injection, in case the person becomes unconscious. the dose of corticosteroid needed may vary with a persons age or size. for example, a child younger than 2 years of age can receive 25 milligrams (mg), a child between 2 and 8 years of age can receive 50 mg, and a child older than 8 years should receive the adult dose of 100 mg.<end>
<question>is gaucher disease inherited ?<answer>this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. the parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to gaucher disease ?<answer>mutations in the gba gene cause gaucher disease. the gba gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called beta-glucocerebrosidase. this enzyme breaks down a fatty substance called glucocerebroside into a sugar (glucose) and a simpler fat molecule (ceramide). mutations in the gba gene greatly reduce or eliminate the activity of beta-glucocerebrosidase. without enough of this enzyme, glucocerebroside and related substances can build up to toxic levels within cells. tissues and organs are damaged by the abnormal accumulation and storage of these substances, causing the characteristic features of gaucher disease.<end>
<question>what is (are) gaucher disease ?<answer>gaucher disease is a rare, inherited disorder in which you do not have enough of an enzyme called glucocerebrosidase. this causes too much of a fatty substance to build up in your spleen, liver, lungs, bones and, sometimes, your brain. this prevents these organs from working properly. there are three types: - type 1, the most common form, causes liver and spleen enlargement, bone pain and broken bones, and, sometimes, lung and kidney problems. it does not affect the brain. it can occur at any age. - type 2, which causes severe brain damage, appears in infants. most children who have it die by age 2. - in type 3, there may be liver and spleen enlargement. the brain is gradually affected. it usually starts in childhood or adolescence. gaucher disease has no cure. treatment options for types 1 and 3 include medicine and enzyme replacement therapy, which is usually very effective. there is no good treatment for the brain damage of types 2 and 3. nih: national institute of neurological disorders and stroke<end>
<question>how many people are affected by gaucher disease ?<answer>gaucher disease occurs in 1 in 50,000 to 100,000 people in the general population. type 1 is the most common form of the disorder; it occurs more frequently in people of ashkenazi (eastern and central european) jewish heritage than in those with other backgrounds. this form of the condition affects 1 in 500 to 1,000 people of ashkenazi jewish heritage. the other forms of gaucher disease are uncommon and do not occur more frequently in people of ashkenazi jewish descent.<end>
<question>is fragile x syndrome inherited ?<answer>fragile x syndrome is inherited in an x-linked dominant pattern. a condition is considered x-linked if the mutated gene that causes the disorder is located on the x chromosome, one of the two sex chromosomes. (the y chromosome is the other sex chromosome.) the inheritance is dominant if one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. x-linked dominant means that in females (who have two x chromosomes), a mutation in one of the two copies of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. in males (who have only one x chromosome), a mutation in the only copy of a gene in each cell causes the disorder. in most cases, males experience more severe symptoms of the disorder than females. in women, the fmr1 gene premutation on the x chromosome can expand to more than 200 cgg repeats in cells that develop into eggs. this means that women with the premutation have an increased risk of having a child with fragile x syndrome. by contrast, the premutation in men does not expand to more than 200 repeats as it is passed to the next generation. men pass the premutation only to their daughters. their sons receive a y chromosome, which does not include the fmr1 gene.<end>
<question>what are the genetic changes related to fragile x syndrome ?<answer>mutations in the fmr1 gene cause fragile x syndrome. the fmr1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called fmrp. this protein helps regulate the production of other proteins and plays a role in the development of synapses, which are specialized connections between nerve cells. synapses are critical for relaying nerve impulses. nearly all cases of fragile x syndrome are caused by a mutation in which a dna segment, known as the cgg triplet repeat, is expanded within the fmr1 gene. normally, this dna segment is repeated from 5 to about 40 times. in people with fragile x syndrome, however, the cgg segment is repeated more than 200 times. the abnormally expanded cgg segment turns off (silences) the fmr1 gene, which prevents the gene from producing fmrp. loss or a shortage (deficiency) of this protein disrupts nervous system functions and leads to the signs and symptoms of fragile x syndrome. males and females with 55 to 200 repeats of the cgg segment are said to have an fmr1 gene premutation. most people with a premutation are intellectually normal. in some cases, however, individuals with a premutation have lower than normal amounts of fmrp. as a result, they may have mild versions of the physical features seen in fragile x syndrome (such as prominent ears) and may experience emotional problems such as anxiety or depression. some children with a premutation may have learning disabilities or autistic-like behavior. the premutation is also associated with an increased risk of disorders called fragile x-associated primary ovarian insufficiency (fxpoi) and fragile x-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (fxtas).<end>
<question>what is (are) fragile x syndrome ?<answer>fragile x syndrome is the most common form of inherited developmental disability. a problem with a specific gene causes the disease. normally, the gene makes a protein you need for brain development. but the problem causes a person to make little or none of the protein. this causes the symptoms of fragile x. people with only a small change in the gene might not show any signs of fragile x. people with bigger changes can have severe symptoms. these might include - intelligence problems, ranging from learning disabilities to severe intellectual disabilities - social and emotional problems, such as aggression in boys or shyness in girls - speech and language problems, especially in boys a genetic blood test can diagnose fragile x. there is no cure. you can treat some symptoms with educational, behavioral, or physical therapy, and with medicines. getting treatment early can help. nih: national institute of child health and human development<end>
<question>how many people are affected by fragile x syndrome ?<answer>fragile x syndrome occurs in approximately 1 in 4,000 males and 1 in 8,000 females.<end>
<question>what to do for prostate enlargement: benign prostatic hyperplasia ?<answer>researchers have not found that eating, diet, and nutrition play a role in causing or preventing benign prostatic hyperplasia. however, a health care provider can give information about how changes in eating, diet, or nutrition could help with treatment. men should talk with a health care provider or dietitian about what diet is right for them.<end>
<question>how to prevent prostate enlargement: benign prostatic hyperplasia ?<answer>researchers have not found a way to prevent benign prostatic hyperplasia. men with risk factors for benign prostatic hyperplasia should talk with a health care provider about any lower urinary tract symptoms and the need for regular prostate exams. men can get early treatment and minimize benign prostatic hyperplasia effects by recognizing lower urinary tract symptoms and identifying an enlarged prostate.<end>
<question>what is (are) prostate enlargement: benign prostatic hyperplasia ?<answer>benign prostatic hyperplasiaalso called bphis a condition in men in which the prostate gland is enlarged and not cancerous. benign prostatic hyperplasia is also called benign prostatic hypertrophy or benign prostatic obstruction. the prostate goes through two main growth periods as a man ages. the first occurs early in puberty, when the prostate doubles in size. the second phase of growth begins around age 25 and continues during most of a mans life. benign prostatic hyperplasia often occurs with the second growth phase. as the prostate enlarges, the gland presses against and pinches the urethra. the bladder wall becomes thicker. eventually, the bladder may weaken and lose the ability to empty completely, leaving some urine in the bladder. the narrowing of the urethra and urinary retentionthe inability to empty the bladder completelycause many of the problems associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia.<end>
<question>what are the treatments for prostate enlargement: benign prostatic hyperplasia ?<answer>the complications of benign prostatic hyperplasia treatment depend on the type of treatment. medications medications used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia may have side effects that sometimes can be serious. men who are prescribed medications to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia should discuss possible side effects with a health care provider before taking the medications. men who experience the following side effects should contact a health care provider right away or get emergency medical care: - hives - rash - itching - shortness of breath - rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat - painful erection of the penis that lasts for hours - swelling of the eyes, face, tongue, lips, throat, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs - difficulty breathing or swallowing - chest pain - dizziness or fainting when standing up suddenly - sudden decrease or loss of vision - blurred vision - sudden decrease or loss of hearing - chest pain, dizziness, or nausea during sexual activity these side effects are mostly related to phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors. side effects related to alpha blockers include - dizziness or fainting when standing up suddenly - decreased sexual drive - problems with ejaculation minimally invasive procedures complications after minimally invasive procedures may include - utis - painful urination - difficulty urinating - an urgent or a frequent need to urinate - urinary incontinence - blood in the urine for several days after the procedure - sexual dysfunction - chronic prostatitislong-lasting inflammation of the prostate - recurring problems such as urinary retention and utis most of the complications of minimally invasive procedures go away within a few days or weeks. minimally invasive procedures are less likely to have complications than surgery. surgery complications after surgery may include - problems urinating - urinary incontinence - bleeding and blood clots - infection - scar tissue - sexual dysfunction - recurring problems such as urinary retention and utis problems urinating. men may initially have painful urination or difficulty urinating. they may experience urinary frequency, urgency, or retention. these problems will gradually lessen and, after a couple of months, urination will be easier and less frequent. urinary incontinence. as the bladder returns to normal, men may have some temporary problems controlling urination. however, long-term urinary incontinence rarely occurs. the longer urinary problems existed before surgery, the longer it takes for the bladder to regain its full function after surgery. bleeding and blood clots. after benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery, the prostate or tissues around it may bleed. blood or blood clots may appear in urine. some bleeding is normal and should clear up within several days. however, men should contact a health care provider right away if - they experience pain or discomfort - their urine contains large clots - their urine is so red it is difficult to see through blood clots from benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery can pass into the bloodstream and lodge in other parts of the bodymost often the legs. men should contact a health care provider right away if they experience swelling or discomfort in their legs. infection. use of a foley catheter after benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery may increase the risk of a uti. anesthesia during surgery may cause urinary retention and also increase the risk of a uti. in addition, the incision site of an open prostatectomy may become infected. a health care provider will prescribe antibiotics to treat infections. scar tissue. in the year after the original surgery, scar tissue sometimes forms and requires surgical treatment. scar tissue may form in the urethra and cause it to narrow. a urologist can solve this problem during an office visit by stretching the urethra. rarely, the opening of the bladder becomes scarred and shrinks, causing blockage. this problem may require a surgical procedure similar to tuip. sexual dysfunction. some men may experience temporary problems with sexual function after benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery. the length of time for restored sexual function depends on the type of benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery performed and how long symptoms were present before surgery. many men have found that concerns about sexual function can interfere with sex as much as the benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery itself. understanding the surgical procedure and talking about concerns with a health care provider before surgery often help men regain sexual function earlier. many men find it helpful to talk with a counselor during the adjustment period after surgery. even though it can take a while for sexual function to fully return, with time, most men can enjoy sex again. most health care providers agree that if men with benign prostatic hyperplasia were able to maintain an erection before surgery, they will probably be able to have erections afterward. surgery rarely causes a loss of erectile function. however, benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery most often cannot restore function that was lost before the procedure. some men find a slight difference in the quality of orgasm after surgery. however, most report no difference. prostate surgery may make men sterile, or unable to father children, by causing retrograde ejaculationthe backward flow of semen into the bladder. men flush the semen out of the bladder when they urinate. in some cases, medications such as pseudoephedrine, found in many cold medications, or imipramine can treat retrograde ejaculation. these medications improve muscle tone at the bladder neck and keep semen from entering the bladder. recurring problems. men may require further treatment if prostate problems, including benign prostatic hyperplasia, return. problems may arise when treatments for benign prostatic hyperplasia leave a good part of the prostate intact. about 10 percent of men treated with turp or tuip require additional surgery within 5 years. about 2 percent of men who have an open prostatectomy require additional surgery within 5 years.2 in the years after benign prostatic hyperplasia surgery or treatment, men should continue having a digital rectal exam once a year and have any symptoms checked by a health care provider. in some cases, the health care provider may recommend a digital rectal exam and checkup more than once a year.<end>